THE POOR RICH MAN,
AND THE
RICH POOR MAN.
CHAPTER I.
SCHOOL-DAYS.
Just
out of the little village of Essex, in New
England, and just at the entrance of a rustic bridge,
there is a favourite resting-place for loiterers of all
ages. One of a line of logs that have been laid
down to enable passengers at high water to reach
the bridge dry-shod, affords an inviting seat under
the drooping limbs of some tall sycamores. There
the old sit down to rest their weary limbs, and
read with pensive eye the fond histories that
memory
has written over the haunts of their secluded
lives. There, too, the young pause in their sports,
and hardly know why their eyes follow with such
delight the silvery little stream that steals away
from them, kissing the jutting points of the green
meadows, and winding and doubling its course as
if, like a pleased child, it would, by any pretext,
lengthen its stay;nor, certainly, why no island
that water bounds will ever look so beautiful to
them as that little speck of one above the bridge,
with its burden of willows, elders, and clematis; of
a summer evening, their every leaf lit with the
firefly's lamp;nor why their eye glances from
the white houses of the village street, glimmering
through the trees, and far away over the orchards
and waving grain of the uplands, and past the wavy
line of hills that bound the horizon on one side,
to fix on the bald gray peaks of that mountain wall
whose Indian story the poet has consecrated.
Time will solve to them this
why
.
Under those sycamores, on a certain afternoon
many years past, sat Charlotte May, a pale,
sicklylooking
girl, talking with Harry Aikin; and beside
them Susan May, whose ruddy cheek, laughing eye,
and stocky little person presented an almost
painful
contrast to her stricken sister. Charlotte was
examining with a very pleased countenance a new
little Bible, bound in red morocco. Did Mr.
Reed give you your choice of the prizes, Harry?
she asked.
Oh, no; Mr. Reed is too much afraid of
exciting
our emulation, or rivalry, as he calls it, for
that. He would not even call the books he gave
us prizes; but he just told us what virtue, or
rather
quality, we had been most distinguished for.
I guess I know what yours was, Harry, said
Susan May, looking up from weaving a wreath of
nightshade that grew about them.
What do you guess, Susy?
Why, kindness to everybody!
No, not that.
Well, then, loving everybody.
Harry laughed and shook his head. No, nor
that, Susy; and, opening to the first unprinted page
of the Bible, he pointed to the following testimony,
in his master's autograph. Charlotte read it
aloud: It gives me great pleasure to record here
the diligence and success of my esteemed pupil,
Harry Aikin, and still more to testify to his strict
practice of the golden rule of this book,
Do unto
others as ye would they should do unto you
.
There, there! I knew I guessed right. You
know you couldn't do so if you didn't love
everybody
;
could he, Lottie?
You were not very far from right, Susan,
replied
her sister; for I am sure Harry could not
do so much to make everybody happy if he did not
love almost everybody.
No, indeed, I do not; at least, I feel a great
difference. Do you think, for instance, I love
Morris Finley or Paulina Clark as well as I love
you and Susan? No, not by a sea-full. But, then,
it is very true, as mother used to tell me, if you
want to love people, or
almost
love them, just do
them a kindness, think how you can set about to
make them happier, and the love, or something
that will answer the purpose, will be pretty sure
to come.
It will, said Charlotte, with a faint smile;
otherwise how could we live up to the rule of
this book; and certainly God never gave us a law
that we could not obey if we would. O, Harry,
I am so glad you got the Bible instead of any of
the other books, for I know you will love it, and
study it, and live after it.
I will try, Lottie.
But, then, Harry, it seems to me those that
are well, and strong, and at ease, can never value
that book as those do who are always sick, and
suffering pain.
It was the rarest thing in the world for Charlotte
to allude to her peculiar trials. Harry looked sad,
and little Susan, who had the most marvellous
faculty
of seeing a bright side to every thing, said, in
a tender voice, and putting her arm round her
sister's
neck,
Then, Lottie, there is some comfort in being
sick, is not there?
There is, Susan; there is comfort when you
cannot eat, nor sleep, nor walk abroad in the pure
air, nor look out upon this beautiful world; when
neither doctors' skill nor friends' love can lessen
one pang, it
is
then comfortit is life to the dead,
Susan, to read in this blessed book of God's
goodness
and compassions; to sit, as it were, at the
feet of Jesus, and learn from him who brought life
and immortality to light; that there is a world
where there is no more sickness nor painwhere
all tears are wiped away.
There was a pause, first broken by Susan
asking
if those that were well and happy did not love
to read the Bible too.
Oh, yes, indeed, replied Harry; I remember
mother used to say she read the Bible for every
thingto make her wiser, and better, and happier.
I believe seeing mother so happy over it has
made me like it more.
I should think so, said Susan; I am sure I
should not love to read any thing that did not make
me happybut here comes Morris; what book
did you get, Morris?
Bewick's History of Birds.
B
Oh, full of pictureshow lovely! exclaimed
Susan, running over the leaves; did Paulina
Clark get a book, Morris?
Yes, and she has changed it at Hutchinson's
store for a pink silk handkerchief.
How could she? I am sorry! said Charlotte.
It's just like her! said Susan; and then,
returning
Morris's book, she added, after all, I had
rather have Harry's Bible.
The more goose you, thenmy book cost
twice as much as his Bible.
Did it? Susan was rather crestfallen.
To be sure it did, and, what is more, I can
sell it for twice as much.
Ah, then I've caught you, sir; Harry would
not sell his Bible for any sum, so by your own
rule Harry's is worth the most!
Morris was somewhat disconcerted. He
resumed
,
in a lowered tone, Maybe I should not
sell it just for the dollar and a half; but, then, when
one knows the value of money, one does not like
to have so much lying idle. Money should work,
as father says. If you could reckon interest and
compound interest as well as I can, Miss Susan,
I guess you would not like to have your money
lying idle on a book-shelf!
I don't know what kind of interest compound
interest is, Morris; but I know the interest I take
in a pleasant book is better than a handful of
money, and if I only had the dollar and a half I
would give it to you in a minute for that book.
`
Only had!
' Ah, there's the rub! you people
that despise money never get it, and that is what
father always says.
`
Despise it!
' repeated Susan, sighing as she
knelt on the log between Harry and her sister, and
bound over Charlotte's pale forehead the wreath
of ominous nightshade. `Despise money,' Morris,
I would do any thing in the world to get enough
to take Lottie down to that wonderful New-York
doctor; but there's one comfort, Lottie, she added,
brightening, he might not cure you, and then we
should feel worse than ever.
What doctor is Sue speaking of? asked
Harry, looking up eagerly from his Bible.
Charlotte explained that a cousin living in
New-York
had written to her of a physician in the
city, who had been particularly successful in
treating diseases of the spine. Her cousin had
urged Charlotte's coming to the city, and had
kindly offered to receive the poor invalid at her
house. Father, she said, talks of our going,
but I do not think we can make it out, so I don't
allow myself to think of it
much;
and when
murmuring
thoughts rise, I remember how many rich
people there are who travel the world over, and
consult all the doctors, and are nothing bettered;
and so I put a little patience-salve on the aching
place, and that, as Susy would say, is a great
comfort
when you can't get any thing else.
Yeswhen you can't, replied Harry, fixing
his eyes compassionately on Charlotte's face,
where, though the cheek was pale, and the eye
sunken, the health of the soul was apparent. But
can't there be some way contrived?
We are trying our best at contrivance, Harry.
Father, you know, never has any thing ahead; but
he offered himself to let out old Jock by the day, and
save all he earns towards the journey; that will be
something. I have three dollars left of the last I ever
earned, and dear little Susy has given me five
dollars
,
which aunt Mary sent to buy her a cloak.
And how much will the journey cost,
Charlotte
?
Father says his last journey down to
Barnstable
cost him but ten dollars besides the provision
and fodder he carried in the wagon. New-York
is not as far as Barnstable; but horse-keeping there
is terrible, and I dare not think what the doctor's
bill may be.
Oh, thought Harry, if I were only rich! if
I were only worth fifty dollars! Money he had
none, but he ran over in his mind all his
convertible
property. There's Bounce (his dog); Squire
Allen offered me three dollars for BounceI
thought I would not sell him for a hundred, but he
shall have himand I have been offered two
dollars
for Sprite and Jumper (two black squirrels he
had tamed with infinite pains); and what else have
I? He ran over his little possessions, his
wearing
apparel, article by article; he had no
superfluity
sundry
little keepsakes, but they were out of the
class of money-value articleshis Bible, it was
new and pretty, and would certainly bring a dollar.
He looked at it lovingly, and was obliged again to
look at Charlotte before he mentally added it to
the list. He resolved on his benevolent traffic,
and was just saying, To-morrow, Charlotte, I think
I shall have something to add to your store, when
Morris, who had taken a seat at some distance, and
seemed much absorbed, started up, exclaiming,
Yes, in five years, at compound interest, I
shall have two dollars and a fractionwon't that
be a nest-egg, Harry Aikin?
A tear in Charlotte's eye had already replied to
Harry, but any reply to Morris was cut off by the
appearance of Charlotte's father, Philip May,
coming
down the road. Philip was a most
inoffensive
,
kind-hearted creature; and, though rather an
unproductive labourer in worldly matters, he had,
by dint of harming no one, and serving every one
rather better than himself, kept bright the links of
human brotherhood, and made them felt, too, for his
general appellation was Uncle Phil. As Uncle
Phil approached, it was apparent that the calm
current of his feelings had been ruffled. Little
Susan, her father's pet, with the unerring eye of a
loving child, was the first to perceive this. What's
the matter, father? she asked.
Oh, dreadful bad news! I don't know how
you'll stand it, Charlottethe girls were
breathless
poor,
Jock is gone!
Gone, sir! how gone? what do you mean?
Clean gone!
drownded!
Drowned! oh, dear, how sorry I am! and
poor Jock! was exclaimed and reiterated, while
Uncle Phil turned away to hide certain convulsive
twitches of his muscles.
But it's some comfort, any how, said Susan,
the first to recover herself, that he was so old he
must have died of his own accord before long.
And that comfort you would have had if it had
been me instead of Jock, Susan.
Oh, father!
I did not mean nothing, child; I'm sure I
think it is kind of providential to have a lively
disposition
,
B 2
that's always rising over the top of every
trouble. But then it's so inconvenient to lose
Jock just now, when he's arning money for us;
and how in natur am I ever to get Charlotte to
New-York without him?
Don't think of that now, father; how did the
accident happen?
Ah, that's the onluckiest of all; it beats all
that Sam should be so careless. You know I let
Jock out to Sam Glover to plough his meadow
you said, Charlotte, Jock looked too low in flesh for
hard work; I wish I had taken your warning! Well,
you see, when Sam went to dinner, he tied Jock close
by the river, and somehow the poor critter backed
down the bank into the river, and fell on his back,
and he was tied in such a fashion he could not
move one way or the other, and the water running
into his nostrils, and ears, and mouthand when
Sam came back from dinner it was all over with
him.
Then, said Morris, it was wholly owing to
Sam Glover's carelessness?
To be sure, there was no need on't; if it had
been me, I should have calculated to tie the horse
so that if he did back into the river he could have
helped himself out.
Better have tied him where there was no
danger
of such an accident, Uncle Phil. Uncle Phil
was right in his calculations. What were
accidents
to other men, made up the current of events
to him. But, proceeded Morris, you can
certainly
make Sam pay for the horse? Uncle Phil
made no reply. You mean to get it out of him,
don't you, Uncle Phil?
I kind o' hate toSam ain't rich.
Nobut he is not poor. I heard him say to
father, when he was talking of buying the mountain
farm, that he had two hundred dollars clear of the
world.
He did not, did he?
He certainly did, and I don't see why you
should make him a present of your horse.
Nor do I see, father, why you should not be
just to yourself, said Charlotte.
Well, well, I calculate to do what's fair, all
roundbut Sam felt bad, I tell you! and I did not
want to bear down on him; but when I've got the
mind of the street, I'll do something about speaking
to him.
Charlotte mentally determined to keep her
father up to this resolution, the most energetic that
could be expected from him; and all lamenting the
fate of poor Jock, the parties separated and
proceeded
homeward.
CHAPTER II.
UNCLE PHIL.
We
have rather unceremoniously presented
some of the humble inhabitants of Essex to our
readers. A few more preparatory words to
ensure
a better acquaintance. Philip May was bred
a hatter. His trade and patrimony (amounting to
a few hundred dollars) would have ensured
independence
to most of his countrymen; but Philip
lacked their characteristicsenergy and sound
judgment, and all the prospering
go-ahead
qualities
that abound with them. But, lacking these,
a most kind Providence had given him a
disposition
that made him content without them, and
quite independent of their results. His horizon
was bounded by the present hourhe literally
took no thought for the morrow. He married early,
and in this turning point of life Heaven seemed
to have taken special care of him. Never was a
wife better calculated by vigour, firmness, and
industry
,
to counteract the destructive tendencies of
a shiftless husband. Nor was she, like some
driving
wives, a thorn in her quiet, loving husband's
side. While she cured all the evils that could
be cured in her condition, she endured the
incurable
with cheerfulnessa marvellous lightener of
the burdens of life!
Before his marriage Philip built a house, the
cost of which far exceeding his means, he finished
but one end of it, and the rest was left for the rains
to enter, and the winds to whistle through, till he
took his wife's counsel, sold his house, paid his
debts, and bought a snug little dwelling far more
comfortable than their shingle palace in its best
state.
But, before they arrived at this stage in the
journey of life, both good and evil had chanced to
them. Their firstborn, Ellen, ran into an open
cistern, the surface of which was just on a level
with the platform before the house: so it had
remained
a year after the active child began to run
about; and, to its mother's reiterated requests and
warnings, Philip always answeredNow that's
just what I am going about next week. When
his only child was drowned in this seeming
water-trap
was certainly no time to reproach Philip, and
he who never reproached any one could not be
expected
to make himself an exception. He merely
said, It was a wonderful providence Ellen was
drowned that day, for the very next he calculated
to put a kerb to the cisternbut it was meant so
to behe always felt Ellen was not long for this
world! Their next child was our friend Charlotte;
and she, like her drowned sister, was born with
one of the best mortal giftsa sound constitution,
which, watched over by her wise and vigilant
mother, promised a long life of physical comfort.
But these prospects were sadly reversed when
her father, having one day taken her out in his
wagon, left her holding the reins while he just
stepped to speak to a neighbour. While he was
speaking
, the horse took fright, Charlotte was
thrown out, and received an injury that imbittered
her whole life. Philip was really grieved by this
accident. He said It seemed somehow as if it
was so to be, for he had no thought of taking
Charlotte
out that day till he met her in his way.
His next mishap was the burning of his
workshop
,
in which, on one gusty day, he left a blazing
fire. A consequence so natural seemed very strange
to Uncle Phil, who said It was most
on
accountable
,
for he had often left it just so, and it had
never
burnt up before! This incident gave a new
turn to Philip's life. He abandoned his trade, and
really loving, or, as he said, aiming to suit
everybody
,
he was glad to be rid of incessant complaints
of want of punctuality, bad materials, and bad work,
and became what most imbeciles become sooner
or later, a Jack at all trades. In a community like
that at Essex, where labourers in every
department
are few, and work plenty, even the universal
Jack need not starve; and Uncle Phil, if unskilful
and
slack
, was always good-natured, and seldom so
much engrossed by one employment that he could
not leave it for another. But, though rather an
unprofitable labourer, Uncle Phil had no vices.
He was temperate and frugal in his habits, and
a striking illustration of how far these virtues alone
will sustain a man even in worldly matters. His
small supplies were so well managed by his wife,
that no want was felt by his family during her life.
That valuable life was prematurely ended. Soon
after the birth of her last baby, Uncle Phil was
called up in the night by some cattle having entered
his garden through his rickety fence. His
bedroom
door opened upon the yard; he left it open;
it was a damp, chilling night. Mrs. May, being
her own nurse, had fallen asleep exhausted. She
awoke in an ague that proved the prelude to a
fatal illness; and Uncle Phil, being no curious
tracer
of effects to causes, took no note of the open
door, and the damp night, and replied to the
condolence
of his friends that
Miss
May was too
good a wife for himthe only wonder was
Providence
had spared her so long. More gifted
people
than honest Uncle Phil deposite quietly at the
door of Providence the natural consequences of
their own carelessness.
The baby soon followed its mother, and Philip
May was left with but two childrenCharlotte, at
the time of her mother's death, thirteen, and Susan,
nine. They had been so far admirably trained by
their mother, and were imbued with her character,
seeming only to resemble their father in hearts
running over with the milk of human kindness,
unless
Susan's all-conquering cheerfulness was
derived
from her father's ever-acquiescing patience.
His was a passive virtuehers an active
principle
.
If any one unacquainted with the condition
of life in New-England should imagine that the
Mays had suffered the evils of real poverty, they
must allow us to set them right. In all our
widespread
country there is very little necessary
poverty
.
In New-England
none
that is not the result
of vice or disease. If the moral and physical laws
of the Creator were obeyed, the first of these
causes would be at an end, and the second would
scarcely exist.
[1]
[1]
We have heard a gentleman who, in virtue of the office he
holds as minister at large, is devoted to succouring the poor,
state, that even in this city (New-York), he had known very few
cases of suffering from poverty that might not be traced directly
or indirectly to vice.
Industry and frugality are
wonderful
multipliers of small means. Philip May
brought in but little, but that little was well
administered
.
His house was cleanhis garden
productive
(the girls kept it wed)his furniture
carefully
preservedhis family comfortably clad, and
his girls schooled. No wonder Uncle Phil never
dreamed he was a poor man!
Henry Aikin was the youngest of twelve
children
.
His father was a farmerall his property,
real and personal, might have amounted to some
five or six thousand dollars, and on this he had his
dozen children to feed and clothe, and fit to fill
honourable places in societyto be farmers,
mechanics
,
doctors, ministers, and so on. In such a
family, well regulated, there are excellent lessons
in the economy of human life, and well learned
were they by the Aikins, and afterward well
applied
.
Morris Finley was the son of the only man in
Essex who had not any regular business. He
was what our rustics call a schemer and a jockey;
in a larger sphere he would have been a
speculator
.
Money, not as a means, but as an end,
seemed
to him the chief good; and he had always a
plan for getting a little more of it than his
neighbours
.
He was keen-sighted and quick-witted; of
course he often succeeded, but sometimes failed;
and, distrusted and disliked through life, at the end
of it he was not richer in worldly goods than his
neighbours, and poor indeed was he in all other
respects. He had, however, infused his ruling
passion into his son Morris, and he, being better
educated than his father, and regularly trained to
business, had a far better chance of ultimate
success
.
CHAPTER III.
A FRIEND IN NEED.
A winter
had passed away, and one of our
ungenial
springs, always unkind to invalids, was
wearing to the last days of May. Charlotte's
disease
was aggravated by long confinement, and as
she sat toiling over an old coat of her father's, her
eye turned sadly towards the cold sky and the
thinly-clad boughs of the trees that were rustling
against the window, and that, like her, seemed
pining for warmth and sunshine. Will summer
ever come? she thought; and then, suppressing a
sigh of impatience, she added, but I don't mean
to murmur. At this moment Susan bounded into
the room, her cheek flushed with pleasure.
Good news, good news! she cried, clapping
her hands; Harry has got home!
Has he?
Why, Lottie, you don't seem a bit joyful!
The tears came to Charlotte's eyes. I have
got to be a poor creature indeed, she said, when
the news of Harry's getting home does not make
me joyful.
Oh, but Lottie, it's only because you did not
sleep last night: take a little of your mixture and
lie down, and by the time Harry gets up herehe
told me he should come right upyou will look
glad; I am sure you feel so now.
C
I do, Susy: Essex never seems Essex when
Harry is out of it.
No, I am sure it does not; but, then, if he did
not go away, we should not have the joy of his
coming home. Susan was the first to see the
compensation.
I hope, said Charlotte, after a short pause,
that Harry will not go away again on this
business
;
he may be getting money, but then he
should have been at school the past winter. You
know what Doctor Allen used to say to mother
`Education is the best capital for a young man to
begin with.' I am afraid Harry has caught some
of Morris Finley's notions.
Oh, no, no, Charlotte!they are as different
as day and night. I am sure, if Harry is eager to
get money, it's because he has some good use for
it, and not, like Morris, just for the money's sake.
I hope it is so, but even then I do not like this
travelling about; I am afraid he will get an
unsettled
disposition.
Why, Charlotte, it is not so very pleasant trav
elling about in freezing winter weather, and deep
muddy spring roads, peddling books.
The subject of their discussion broke it off by
his entrance; and, after mutual kind greetings were
over, he sat down by Charlotte with a face that
plainly indicated he had something to say, and
knew not how to begin.
Have you had good luck, Harry? asked
Charlotte
.
Very! The very was most emphatic.
Well, I hope it won't turn your head.
I don't know, he replied, with a smile; it
feels very light just now, and my heart too.
Charlotte looked grave.
No one would think, said Susan, that
Charlotte
was glad to see you, Harry; but she is, for
we both love you just as well as if you were a
brotherhaving none that's natural, you know.
But poor Lottie is worse than ever this spring,
and nothing seems to do her any good; and I have
been trying to persuade her to send round a
subscription-paper
to get money to go to New-York;
maybe she'll consent now you have come to ask
her.
That's the very thing, said Harry, I want
to speak to her about.
Oh, don't, Harry; if our friends and
neighbours
were to think of it themselves, I would
accept
the money thankfully, but I
cannot
ask for it.
You need not, Charlotteyou need notbut
you will take it from a brother, as Susy almost
calls me, won't you?
He hastily took from his pocketbook five
ten-dollar
notes, and put them on Charlotte's lap.
Harry! Charlotte feebly articulated.
Oh, Harry, Harry! shouted Susan, throwing
her arms round his neck in a transport of joy, and
then starting back and slightly blushing; did I
not tell you so, Lottie? she said.
Charlotte smiled through her tears. Not
precisely
so
, Susy, for who could have expected this?
But I might have known it was not for the money,
as you did say, but for what the money would
bring, that Harry was working.
And what could money bring so good as
better
health for you, Charlotte? Your suffering is the
only thing that ever makes me unhappy; and so,
after all, it is selfishness in me.
Happy would it be for our race if there were
more such selfishness as Harry Aikin's. The
benevolent principle is, after all, the true alchymy
that converts the lead to gold.
The preceding fall, and shortly before the scene
described at the bridge, an acquaintance and very
good friend of Harry's, a bookseller in the shire
town of their county, had applied to Harry to be
his agent in peddling books, and had offered him
a tempting per centage on his sales. Harry, then
but fourteen, was rather young for such a business;
but the good bookseller had good reason to rely on
his fidelity and discretion, and hoped much from
his modest and very pleasing address. Harry
communicated the offer to his parents. They told
him to decide for himself; that whatever money
he earned should be his; but that, as he was to go
to a trade the following spring, and the intervening
winter being the only time he had for further
school-education
,
they advised him to forego the
bookseller's
offer. Harry could think of plenty of eligible
appropriations for any sum he might earn; but,
after
a little reflection, nothing that even fifty dollars
could buy weighed in the scales against six
months' good instruction; and, thanking his
parents
for their liberality to him, he decided on the
school. This decision occurred on the very day
of poor Jock's untimely death, and was reversed
by that event, and the consequent overthrow of
Charlotte May's project. He immediately
conceived
the design of effecting her journey to
New-York
by the result of his labour; and,
communicating
his purpose to his two confidential friends, his
parents (most happy are those children who make
their parents the depositaries of their secrets), he
received their consent and approbation. They
were consistent Christians, and thought that active
goodness enriched their child far more than money,
or even than education, which they held to be next
best to virtue. The contract was made with the
bookseller, and the fifty dollars, an immense sum to
him that earned it, and to her who received it,
estimated
by the painstaking of the one, and the relief
and gratitude of the other, were appropriated to the
expenses of the New-York journey.
Those who travel the world over seeking
pleasures
that have ceased to please; going, as some
one has said, from places where no one regrets
them, to places where no one expects them, can
hardly conceive of the
riches
of a poor person, who,
having fifty dollars to spend on the luxury of a
journey, feels the worth of every sixpence
expended
in a return of either advantage or
enjoyment
.
If any of my readers have chanced to hear a
gentleman curse his tailor, who has sent home, at
the last moment, some new exquisite articles of
apparel for a journey, when they were found to be
a hair's breadth too tight or too loose; or if they
have assisted at the perplexed deliberations of a
fine lady as to the colour and material of her new
dresses and new hat, and have witnessed her
vexations with dressmakers and milliners, we
invite them to peep into the dwelling of our young
friends, and witness the actual happiness resulting
C 2
from the successful expedients and infinite
ingenuity
of the poor.
The practicability of the long-wished-for journey
had been announced to Uncle Phil, and they were
entering upon deliberations about the outfit, when
their father, beginning, as need was, at the crown
of his head, exclaimed, I declare, gals, I never
told you my bad luck about my tother hat. I laid
it down by the door just for a minute last
Sabbath
,
and our plaguy pup run off with it into a
mud-puddleit was the worse for wear before,
and it looks like all natur now.
Let us look at it, father, said Susan; there
are not many people that know you in New-York,
and maybe we can smooth it up and make it do.
The hat was brought, and examined, and heads
mournfully shaken over it; no domestic
smoothing-up
process would make it decent, and
decency
was
to be attained. Suddenly, Charlotte remembered
that during her only well week that spring, she
had bound some hats for Mr. Ellis, the hatter, and
Susan was despatched to ascertain if her earnings
amounted to enough to pay for the re-dressing of
her father's hat. Iris could scarcely have returned
quicker than did Susan; indeed, her little
divinity-ship
seldom went on such pleasant errands.
Everybody
in the world is kind to us, said Susan,
as she re-entered, breathless. Mr. Ellis has sent
full pay for your work, Lottie, and says he'll dress
father's hat over for nothing. I'm so glad, for now
you can get a new riband for your bonnet.
After all the necessaries are provided.
Anybody but you, Lottie, would call that a
necessary. Do look at this old dudall frayed
out. It has been turned, and died, and sponged,
and now it is not fit to wear in Essexwhat will
they say to it in New-York?
We'll see, Susy, how we come out. Father's
Sunday coat
must
be turned. The coat was
turned, and the girls were delighted to see it look
almost
as well as new; and even Susan was
satisfied
to pay the hat-money to Sally Fen, the
tailoress
.
A long deliberation followed upon father's nether
garments, and they came to the conclusion they
were quite too bad to be worn where father was
not known and respected. And, to get new ones,
Charlotte must give up buying a new cloak, and
make her old one do. There is a lively pleasure
in this
making do
that the rich know not of; the
cloak was turned, rebound, and new-collared, and
Susan said, Considering what a pretty colour it
was, and how natural Charlotte looked in it, she
did not know but what she liked it better than a
new one. And now, after Charlotte had bleached
and remodelled her five-year old Dunstable, her
dress was in order for the expeditionall but the
riband, on which Susan's mind was still intent.
Not but just ninepence left, said she to
Charlotte
,
after the last little debt for the outfit was
paid. Ninepence won't buy the riband, that's
certain, though Mr. Turner is selling off so cheap.
Why can't you break into the fifty dollars; I do
hate to have you seen in New-York with that old
riband, Lottie.
But I must, Susanfor I told Harry I would
not touch the fifty dollars till we started.
Well, give me the ninepence, then. Susan's
face brightened. She had resolved, as a last
resort
,
to invest in the riband a certain precious
quarter
of a dollar which Harry had given her ages
and ages ago, and which she had ever since worn
as a locket. She left her sister abruptly; and, as
she slid the coin from the riband, Dear little
locket, said she, I suppose you will seem to
other folks just like any other quarter, and they
will just pass you from hand to hand without
thinking at all about youhow foolish I am!she
dashed a tear from her eyeSha'n't I love Harry
just as well, and won't he love me just as well,
and sha'n't I think of him more than ever now he
has been so kind to Lottie, without having this to
put me in mind of him? This point settled to
her own satisfaction, she turned as usual to the
bright side. How lucky Mr. Turner is selling
offI wonder what colour I had best get
Charlotte
would like brown, it's so durablebut she
looks so pretty in pink. It takes off her pale look,
and casts such a rosy shadow on her cheek. But
I am afraid she will think pink too gay for her.
Thus weighing utility and sobriety against taste
and becomingness, Susan entered the shop, and
walking up to the counter, espied in a glass case
a pink and brown plaid riband. Her own taste
was gratified, and Charlotte's economy and
preference
of modest colours would be satisfied
in short, it was (all women will understand me)
just the thing
. She was satisfied, delighted, and,
had not the master of the shop kept her waiting
five minutes, she would have forgotten the
inestimable
value of that quarter, that in addition to
the ninepence must be paid. But in five minutes
the feelings go through many changes; and, when
Mr. Fuller said, Here is your riband, Susan
May! Susan was standing with her back to the
counter, and looking at the quarter as if she
were studying it. She had on a deep sun-bonnet;
as she raised her head it fell back and disclosed a
tear on her cheek, and disclosed it, too, to Harry
Aikin, who had come in unobserved, and was
standing before her. She hastily threw down the
moneyit rolled on to the floorhe picked it up
he recognised it, and at once understood the whole.
Susan left the shop first, and we believe few ladies,
though they may have spent hundreds in the
splendid
shops of Broadway, have had half the pleasure
from their purchases that Susan May had from the
acquisition of this two yards of plaid riband. We
ask, which was richest (in the true sense of the
word), the buyer of Cashmire shawls and blonde
capes, or our little friend Susan? And when Harry,
overtaking her before she reached her own
door-step
,
restored the precious quarter, she was not
conscious of an ungratified wish. Had they been a
little older, there might have been some shyness,
some blushes and stammerings; but now, Susan
frankly told him her reluctance to part with it, her
joy in getting it back again; and, suspending it by
its accustomed riband, she wore it ever aftera
little nearer the heart than before!
Charlotte's last obstacle to leaving home was
relieved
by an invitation from Harry's mother to
Susan
,
to pass the time of her sister's absence with
her. How thoughtful of Mrs. Aikin! said
Charlotte
,
after she had gratefully accepted the
invitation
.
If there were more of this
thoughtfulness
, if
persons were more zealous to employ the means
of little kindnesses to their fellow-creatures, if
they considered them as members of their own
family, really brothers and sisters, how many
burdens
would be lightened, what a harvest of smiles
we should have on faces now sour and steril.
CHAPTER IV.
A POOR MAN'S JOURNEY.
It
was a lovely morning in June when Uncle
Phil set forth for New-York with his invalid
daughter. Ineffable happiness shone through his
honest face, and there was a slight flush of hope
and expectation on Charlotte's usually pale and
tranquil countenance as she half rebuked Susan's
last sanguine expression
You will come home as well as I am, I know
you will, Lottie!
Not welloh, no, Susy, but better, I expect
I mean, I hope.
Better, then, if you are, that is to say, a
great
deal better
I shall be satisfied, sha'n't you, Harry?
I shall be satisfied that it was best for her to
go, if she is any better.
I trust we shall all be satisfied with God's
will, whatever it may be, said Charlotte,
turning
her eye full of gratitude upon Harry.
Harry
arranged her cushions as nobody else could
to support her weak back; Susan disposed her
cloak so that Charlotte could draw it around her if
the air proved too fresh; and then, taking her
willow
basket in her hand, the last words were
spoken
,
and they set forth. Uncle Phil was in the
happiest of his happy humours. He commended
the wagonit was just like sitting at home in a
rocking-chairit is kind o' lucky that you are
lame, Lottie, or maybe Mrs. Sibley would not have
offered to loan us her wagon. I was dreadful
fraid we should have to go down the North River.
I tell you, Lottie, when I crossed over it once, I
was a most scared to deaththe water went swash,
swashthere was nothing but a plank between
me and
etarnity;
and I thought in my heart I should
have gone down, and nobody would ever have
heard of me again. I wonder folks can be so
foolish as to go on water when they can travel on
solid landbut I suppose some do!
It is pleasanter, said Charlotte, to travel at
this season where you can see the beautiful fruits
of the earth, as we do now, on all sides of us.
Uncle Phil replied and talked on without disturbing
his daughter's quiet and meditation. They
travelled
slowly, but he was never impatient, and she
never wearied, for she was an observer and lover
of nature. The earth was clothed with its richest
greenwas all green, but of infinitely varied teints.
The young corn was shooting forththe winter
wheat already waved over many a fertile hillside
the gardens were newly made, and clean, and
full of promiseflowers, in this month of their
abundance, perfumed the woods, and decked the
gardens and courtyards, and where nothing else
grew, there were lilachs and pionies in plenty.
The young lambs were frolicking in the fields
the chickens peeping about the barnyards; and
birds, thousands of them, singing at their work.
Our travellers were descending a mountain
where their view extended over an immense tract
of country, for the most part richly cultivated.
I declare, exclaimed Uncle Phil, how much
land there is in the world, and I don't own a foot
on't, only our little half-acre lotit don't seem
hardly right. Uncle Phil was no agrarian, and
he immediately added, But, after all, I guess I
am better off without itit would be a dreadful
care.
Contentment with godliness is great gain,
said Charlotte.
You've hit the nail on the head, Lottie; I don't
know who should be contented if I ain'tI
always
have enough, and everybody is friendly to
meand you and Susan are worth a mint of money
to me. For all what I said about the land, I really
think I have got my full share.
We can all have our share in the beauties of
God's earth without owning, as you say, a foot of
it, rejoined Charlotte. We must feel it is our
father's. I am sure the richest man in the world
cannot take more pleasure in looking at a beautiful
prospect than I door in breathing this sweet,
sweet air. It seems to me, father, as if every thing
I look upon was ready to burst forth in a hymn of
praiseand there is enough in my heart to make
verses of if I only knew how.
That's the mystery, Lottie, how they do it
I can make one line, but I can never get a fellow
to it.
Well, father, as Susy would say, it's a comfort
to have the feeling, though you can't express it.
Charlotte was right. It is a great comfort and
happiness to have the feeling, and happy would it
be if those who live in the country were more
sensible
to the beauties of nature; if they could see
something in the glorious forest besides good
wood and timber lotssomething in the green
valley
besides a warm soilsomething in a
water-fall
besides a mill-privilege. There is a
susceptibility
in every human heart to the ever-present and
abounding beauties of nature; and whose fault is
it that this taste is not awakened and directed? If
the poet and the painter cannot bring down their
arts to the level of the poor, are there none to be
God's interpreters to themto teach them to read
the great book of nature?
The labouring classes ought not to lose the
pleasures that, in the country, are before them
from dawn to twilightpleasures that might
counterbalance
,
and often do, the profits of the
merchant
,
pent in his city counting-house; and all the
honours the lawyer earns between the court-rooms
and his office. We only wish that more was made
of the
privilege
of country life; that the farmer's
wife would steal some moments from her cares
to point out to her children the beauties of nature,
whether amid the hills and valleys of our inland
country, or on the sublime shores of the ocean.
Over the city, too, hangs the vault of heaven
thick inlaid with the witnesses of God's power
and goodnesshis altars are everywhere.
D
The rich man who lives at home at ease, and
goes irritated and fretting through the country
because
he misses at the taverns the luxuries of his
own housewho finds the tea bad and coffee worse
the food ill cooked and table ill servedno
mattresses
,
no silver forkswho is obliged to endure
the vulgarity of a common parlourand, in spite of
the inward chafing, give a civil answer to
whatever
questions may be put to him, cannot conceive of
the luxuries our travellers enjoyed at the simplest
inn.
Uncle Phil found out the little histories of all the
wayfarers he met, and frankly told his own.
Charlotte's
pale sweet face attracted general sympathy.
Country people have time for little by-the-way
kindnesses; and the landlady, and her daughters,
and her domestics inquired into Charlotte's malady,
suggested remedies, and described similar cases.
The open-hearted communicativeness of our
people is often laughed at; but is it not a sign of a
blameless life and social spirit?
CHAPTER V.
CHARLOTTE'S RETURN.
On
the very day she had appointed before
leaving
home, Charlotte, by dint of arranging for her
father, giving him now a hint and now an impulse,
returned there. Susan had opened, swept, and
garnished the house with plenty of laurels and
roses, and Mrs. Aikin and some other kind matrons
had sent in a store of provisions, so that Susan
spread her tea-table with the abundance and
variety
that characterize the evening meal in
New-England
.
Fresh biscuit and cookies, cherry-pie, smoked
beef, stewed currants, peppergrass, cheese, and
radishes, were on the tablethe tea-kettle hissing
a welcome over the fire, and Susan and Harry
standing at the door and gazing at a turn in the
road, where, between two branching elms that
imbowered
it, appeared Uncle Phil's wagon, and
Charlotte
was soon folded in the arms of her loving
sister
,
and receiving a welcome nowise less joyful
from Harry.
I declare, said Uncle Phil, after the first
salutations
were passed, surveying the table with
ineffable satisfaction, you've set out what I call
a tea, Susy. You beat 'em all in Yorkthey live
dreadful poor down there. To be sure, your Aunt
Betsey lives in a brick house, and has a sight of
furniture, and a gimcrack of a timepiece on her
mantelpiece (it don't go half so true as our old
wooden one), and high plated candlesticks, and
such knick-knacks; yet she has all her bread to
buy by the loaf, and the milk is sky-blue; as to
cream, I don't believe they ever heard on't. Cakes
and pies are scarce, I tell you. I don't believe
peppergrass has come there yet, for I never saw a
spear of it on the table, nor a speck of cheese.
But the worst of all is the water. Poor Jock
would have choked before he would have drank
a drop of it; and they live in such a dust and
hurra, I tho't when we drove in it was gineral
training; but they carried on so every day;and
then there is such a stifled-up feelingI did pity
'em.
Persons capable of more accurate comparison
than Uncle Phil, may well pity those who, when
summer is in its beauty, are shut up within the
walls of a city, deprived of the greatest of all
luxuries
,
which even the poorest country people
enjoy
sweet
air, ample space, pure water, and
quiet only broken by pleasant sounds.
And often, too, have we felt a pity for the
citizen
similar to Uncle Phil's, when we have
compared
the tea-table of those we
call
poor in the
country with the uninviting evening meal of the
affluent in town. Ah, father, replied Susan,
you must remember we don't set out such a table
very often
here
. I am sure I never could if we
had not such kind neighbours; but, when they
are kind, it don't seem to me to make much
difference
whether you are rich or poor.
Susan's simple remark had an important bearing
on that great subject of inequality of condition,
which puzzles the philosopher, and sometimes
disturbs
the Christian. But did not our happy little
friend suggest a solution to the riddle? Has not
Providence made this inequality the necessary
result of the human condition, and is not the true
agrarian principle to be found in the voluntary
exercise of those virtues that produce an
interchange
of benevolent offices? If there were a
perfect
community of goods, where would be the
opportunity
for the exercise of the virtues, of justice,
and mercy, humility, fidelity, and gratitude? If
the rights of the poor
of all classes
were
universally
acknowledged, if intellectual and moral
education
were what they should be, the deaf would
hear, and the blind would see; and the rich man
would no longer look with fear upon the poor man,
nor the poor man with envy on the rich. This
true millennium is on its way. Blessed are those
who wait!
Our friends were soon seated at their tempting
tea-table, where Susan tried to busy herself with
her duties, but her eyes continually rested on her
sister's pale face, and it was all she could do to
repress her tears and speak cheerfully when she
saw plain indications that Charlotte had not reaped
the advantage from her journey that they had too
sanguinely expected. She perceived that
Charlotte
,
instead of tasting the delicacies prepared for
her, declined them all, even the warm biscuit and
cherry-pie, and the radishes too, which she
particularly
liked, and made her meal of a cracker she
took from her bag, and a glass of water. Susan
dared not trust her voice to ask questions;
Charlotte
made no explanations; Harry's eyes followed
Susan's, but he was silent; and Uncle Phil, too
happy at getting home to observe the feelings of
the parties, merely murmured once when Charlotte
refused the cake, Them New-York doctors are
dum notional!
When the tea was over, Susan could bear it no
longer; and the tears streaming from her eyes, she
said, Oh, Lottie, 'tis a comfort to get you home,
though you an't cured. The ice was now broken
and Charlotte, much refreshed by her simple meal
proceeded to relate the circumstances of her
journey
;
D 2
but, as her narrative was prolonged by
digressions
,
and broken by the comments of her
eager listeners, we shall give its purport briefly.
The pleasure of the journey, and the hope of a
cure from the far-famed New-York doctor, wrought
wonders on Charlotte's feeble frame; and when
she arrived at her aunt's, she felt more strength
and ease than she had experienced for years; and,
but for certain sharp twinges, she said she should
have saved Harry's money and not consulted the
doctor. The doctor, however, was summoned, and
seemed at once inspired with an interest for his
humble patient that was hardly to be expected from
a man at the head of his profession, and whose
attendance was sought at every moment by the
first in the land. But Dr.  was no common
man, and was a most rare physician. He studied
the mind as well as the body; he endeavoured to
comprehend their delicate relations and bearings
upon each other, and in his profession he
ministered
to both. He was a religious man in
principle
,
and earnestly so in feeling; and, by getting
into the hearts of his patientsinto the inner
temple
,
by addressing them as religious beings, by
rousing their faith and fortitude, or their
submission
and patience, he was sure, as Charlotte
said, to find a medicine that would do them good,
if all drugs failed; and, if the case was curable,
his prescriptions operated like the old woman's
herb, that with a blessing always cured.
After an examination, he ascertained Charlotte's
malady to a certainty, and that it was
incurable;
but he did not shock her by at once telling her
this. He visited her repeatedly, talked patiently
over that subject so interesting to all
valetudinarians
,
the long history of her sickness. Thus, by
degrees, he learned what he was studyingthe
constitution of her mind. He found she was
judicious
,
rational, self-denying, steadfast, humble, and
patient; and he then proceeded to give his advice,
not with the promise of curing her, but with the
well-grounded expectation of protracting her life,
and rendering it comparatively comfortable to
herself
and useful to others. After having gradually
prepared her for his opinion, he told it, and found, as
he expected, that her mind was soon made up to the
defeat of her hopes, and to the certainty of
enduring
through life a very painful disease; and not
merely because it was an inevitable calamity, for
when she could trust her voice to speak, she said,
I can yet say, sir,
God's will be done!
but I
am so sorry for Susy's and Harry's disappointment!
I am
very
sorry too, said the kind doctor,
wiping his eyes; but it is better for them, as
well as for you, that you should all know the real
state of the case.
Oh, yes, sir, far better; for I know it is much
easier to endure when we are
certain
there is no
help for us.
Your case is not so bad as that, my child; I
said there was no
cure;
there is
help
, if you will
strictly adhere to the directions I give you; but it
will be time enough for that to-morrow. I now
leave you to rest, and to seek help and consolation
where, I am sure, from your prompt submission,
you are in the habit of going for it.
I am, sir, and it never fails me.
And it never will, my child. Happy is it for
doctors and patients, when they are both in habits
of dependance on the Great Physician.
The next day Charlotte met the doctor with a
peaceful smile on her face. The flush of hope
had faded from her cheek, but the sweet light of
resignation was there.
You have been to the unfailing source of
strength and peace, my child, said the doctor,
and now sit down, and we will talk over what is
best for the future. You have been, as you have
told me, all your life in the habit of taking
medicines
from various doctorsnow a
sirup
is
recommended
,
now a
mixture;
now these pills, and
now those; now some new foreign medicine, and
now an Indian doctor's nostrums; and, worse than
all, every now and then
a course of medicine
.
Henceforth take no more of it, of any sort; it has
no more tendency to remove your disease than it
would have to restore your leg if it had been sawn
off and thrown away. Medicines, drugs, my child,
are all poisons. We are obliged to give them to
arrest the progress of acute diseases; but, in
chronic
diseases, instead of curing, they obstruct and
clog the efforts of nature, and confound her
operations
.
They debilitate the stomach, and produce a
thousand of what you call `bad feelings,' evils often
worse than the malady they are employed to cure.
I'll tell you a secret, my child; the older we doctors
grow, the less medicine we give; and, though the
world is slow to get wisdom, drugs are much less
in fashion than when I was a young man. Don't
be persuaded to try this and try that; each dose
may do you harm, and cannot possibly do you any
good. Poor people do not know what an
advantage
they have over the rich, in not being able to call
the doctor for every finger-ache, or to keep a
well-furnished
medicine-chest in their houses. I am no
wizard, but I can usually tell by the looks of the
family whether there are plenty of labelled vials in
the cupboard. The poor have many facilities for
health over the rich; I speak of the comparatively
poorthank God, there are few in our country that
would be called poor in other landsfew who
cannot
obtain healthful food, and plenty of it. They
are not, like the rich, tempted to excess by various
and delicately-cooked dishes; but, then, from
ignorance
or carelessness, they do not properly
prepare
their food; you have heard the old proverb,
my childits meaning is too true`the Lord sends
meats, but the devil sends cooks.' The poor
man's flour is as wholesome as the rich man's, but
his wife makes her bread carelessly, and it is sour
or heavy, or eaten hot, and about as digestible as
brick-bats. A poor woman, for want of a little
forethought and arrangement, gets her work into a
snarl; meal-time is at handher husband coming
in from his workchildren hungryshe makes a
little short-cake, or claps down before the fire in a
spider some half-risen doughis it not so?
Dear me! yes, sirbut how should you know
it?
A physician sees every mode of life, and
learns much in his profession by observing them.
Such bread as I have described, I have seen
accompanied
with cucumbers, Dutch cheese, fried
cakes, and messes of meat done up in grease.
Half the fine gentlemen and nervous ladies in our
city would have been thrown into fits or fevers
by one such meal. The poor are saved by the
invigorating effect of labour in the open airwhen
they are savedbut sickness and death often ensue.
Among all our benevolent societies, I wish there
was one for teaching the poor the arts of health
to begin with cooking well plain food. Why, if
our
poor knew how to manage their means of
health and comfort, they might live as if they
were in paradise. A sound mind in a sound body
will make almost a paradise even of this
rough-going
world.
I should think so, sir, said Charlotte, with a
sigh; but, she added, modestly, I hope,
doctor
,
you do not think we live at home in the way
you have described?
Oh no, my child, certainly not, by no means.
Indeed, we do not, sir; though I was only
thirteen, and my little sister, our Susy, nine, when
mother died, she had taught us to make her good
bread. I mixed it, and Susy, a strong child, kneaded
it: we always calculate to have light bread and
good butter. We always have meat, for father
thinks he can't do without it three times a day.
Susy is a hearty eater, toomy appetite is poor,
but our neighbours are very considerate, and I'm
seldom without pie, or cake, or preserves, or
something
relishing. You smile, sirI don't wish to
have you think we live daintilyI don't know
how it is in cities, but country people are
thoughtful
of one another, and any one out of health has
such things sent in.
Pies, cakes, and preserves?
Yes, sir; things that taste pleasant, and are
kind of nourishing.
Nourishing to the disease, my poor child, not
to the patient. Pies, cakes, and sweetmeats are
only fit for the healthy, and for those who can
labour, or
exercise
, a name that, as somebody says,
the rich give to their labour. No; if you mean to
enjoy all the comfort your case admits of, you
must discard these nice things.
I can, sir, if it is duty.
I do not doubt, my child, that you both can and
will do whatever you believe to be duty, and I
must have great confidence in those whom I
believe
able to subdue their appetities to perfect
obedience
in these matters. You will make it a
religious
dutymost persons are enslaved by their
appetites, because they do not bring their
religion
to bear upon such a small matter as
eating
or not eating a bit of pie. The light of the
sun is as essential to the hut as to the palace; so
religion is as necessary to help us through small
duties as great; it is easier to suffer martyrdom
with its help, than to make a temperate meal
without
it. But there is no need of all this preaching
to you, my child; you, I am sure, will cheerfully
do whatever is necessary to preserve the faculties
of your mind and body.
I calculate to try to do what is about right,
sir.
And that is the best possible calculation, and
will lead to the very best result. There is nothing
for me to do but to tell you how, in my opinion,
you can best do your duty to your bodya poor
infirm casket it is, but it contains an immortal
treasure, and must therefore be taken good care
of.
It is not necessary to give the doctor's
directions
,
in regard to Charlotte's food, in detail. Her
diet was to consist of plain food, plainly dressed;
and when he finished, Charlotte said, with a smile,
As to eating, sir, I shall be as well off as if I
were the richest lady in the land, for I can easily
get the food you think convenient for me.
As well off, and far better, my dear child; I
have many rich patients to whom I make the same
prescription; but, surrounded as they are by
tempting
luxuries, they are for ever transgressing and
sufferingthey do not enough take to heart the
wise saying, that they that do the things that
please the Lord shall receive of the fruit of the
tree of immortality. But, Miss Charlotte, there are
other matters besides eating to which you must be
attentive; gentle and regular exercise you must
haveriding will not suit you.
That's a real mercy, sir; for, since father has
lost his horse, I have no way to ride.
You have a little house-keeping, what the
women call stirring about, to dosweeping,
washing
dishes, setting tables, and so on?
Yes, sir, but I have let our Susy do it; and,
when I was able, taken in sewing, because that
brought us in a little money.
You must not sit at your needle; none but the
strong can bear that. Your little hardy sister
must take that part.
Well, that is a comfort, as Susy would herself
say, for I want her to learn the tailoress' trade,
and Miss Sally Baker had agreed to teach her for
the rent of our back room.
By all means, said the doctor, entering with
the most benevolent interest into Charlotte's plans,
let Miss Sally have the back room; then Susy
will be handy to call upon to do the heavier work,
for you must not lift, or do any thing that requires
strengthbut I have observed that you
women-folk
can keep yourselves busy about what we
men can't describe, nor even comprehend. Your
housework is a source of contentmenta rich lady
of my acquaintance says she envies her servants
who have
kitchen-work
to go to in all their troubles.
I never thought of that, sir; but it does lighten
the heart to stir about, and it is a pleasure to make
the most of a little, and have things orderly and
comfortable.
Oh yes, my child; the world is full of these
small provisions for our happiness if we had but
eyes to see them and hearts to feel them. But
let me proceed to my prescriptions. You must
wear flannel drawers and a flannel waistcoat with
sleeves all the year round. This to an invalid is,
in our varying climate, essential, for in no other
way can the skin be kept of a warm and regular
temperature.
[2]
[2]
A friend of mine proposes that New-England artists should
paint the goddess of health with flannel drawers in her hand.
Can you procure the flannel, my
child?
I think I can, sir; Susy and I calculated to
get us new woollen gowns next winter, but I guess
we can make the old ones do.
That's right, my dear. If I could only
persuade
those who can't afford to get every thing, to
dispense with new outside garments, and furnish
themselves with plenty of flannel, I would promise
E
to save them half their doctors' bills. The
doctor
then proceeded to a prescription which, at first,
seemed very extraordinary to Charlotte; but he
urged it so strenuously, and told her that he knew it
from experience to be of the first importance in
preserving
the health of the healthy, and
strengthening
the invalid, that she resolved, whatever trouble
it might cost her, to follow strictly his advice.
This advice was, that she should every day bathe
her whole person in cold water, and rub her skin
till it was dry and warm. He knew she had not
conveniences for bathing, but this might be effected
with a tub, or even a basin of water, and a sponge.
Charlotte afterward, and after long experience,
acknowledged that this simple prescription had
done her more good than all the medicine she had
ever taken. Finally, the doctor charged her not
to wear at night the garments she wore in the
day; not to make up her bed till it was thoroughly
aired; not to be afraid of fresh air; to let plenty
of it into the house; and especially, if at any time
she was so much indisposed as to be confined to
her bed, to have the air of her room constantly
changed. He said people suffered more from
inattention to cleanliness and fresh air, than from
any necessary physical evils. I cannot, he said,
in conclusion, but observe the goodness of
Providence
in making those things which are essential
to health accessible to all; I mean, to all the native
population of our country; for they can have all
that I have prescribed for you, Miss Charlotte;
abundance of simple, nourishing food, warm
garments
,
plenty of clean water, and pure air; the
two last articles, more valuable than all the gold
of Peru, are sadly undervalued and neglected.
At first it must be confessed that Charlotte was
disappointed that the doctor prescribed no
medicine
,
no plaster, nothing from which she might
expect
sudden relief; but she soon looked calmly
and submissively at the case as it was, and
received
most thankfully the prospect of alleviation.
Dr.  inspired her with entire confidence; and
afterward, in relating the story to Susan and Harry
of her long interviews with him, she said it
seemed
to her mysterious he took such an interest in
her. To them it did not, nor could it to any one
who knew the sweetly patient sufferer, nor to any
one who knew Dr. , and knew that he valued
his profession chiefly as enlarging his means of
doing moral and physical good to his
fellow-creatures
.
And only think, said Charlotte, in conclusion,
taking from her trunk a note which she had
wrapped
in her handkerchief, that it might get no spot
or blemish on it, only think, after all, after his
coming to see me six times, and staying as long as
if he had been a common doctor, and had not any
other patient, only think of his sending me this
billet
at last.
In justice to Charlotte, we shall first give her
note to the doctor, as we think it marks the
dignity
,
integrity, and simplicity of her character.
Honoured Sir
As father and I have
concluded
to leave to-morrow, will be much obliged if
you will send in your bill this afternoon, if
convenient
.
As, from all that's passed, sir, you may
conclude
that I ain't in circumstances to pay down, I
would make bold to say that you need not scruple,
as I have a large sum of money by me, given to
me by my best friend, father and Susan excepted.
Father sends his respectful duty to you, sir, and I
mine, with many thanks; but neither money nor
thanks can pay your kindness; and daily, respected
sir, shall I ease my heart by remembering you in
my prayers at the throne of grace, where we must
all appear alike poor and needy, but where may
you ever come with a sure foundation of hope,
through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
I remain, sir, your faithful friend and
well-wisher
,
Charlotte May
.
To which note the doctor replied
My good friend Charlotte
I shall preface
my answer to your note with letting you a little
into my professional affairs. I do not make it a rule
to attend the poor gratuitously, for many reasons;
but principally because I have observed that what
is got for nothing is seldom valued. I only take
care to charge them according to their ability to
pay. You, my child, are an exception to most of
my patientsyou have given me a lesson of meek
and cheerful submission that is inestimableI am
your debtor, not you mine. Besides, strictly, I
have no
doctor's
account against you. I have
prescribed
no medicine, and given you no advice that
any man of sense and experience might not have
given; therefore, my good girl, I have no claim on
that `
large sum of money
,' which, God bless your
`best friend' for having given you. But forget
not, my friend, your promise to remember me in
your prayers; I have much faith in the `prayers
of saints.' My parting regards to your good
father
,
and please deliver the accompanying parcels
as directed. They are from my son and daughter,
who hastily join me in esteem for you and yours.
God bless you, my dear child.
Your sincere friend,
One parcel was directed To Miss Charlotte
May's
sister Susy
, and the other, To Miss
Charlotte
May's `
best friend, father and Susy
excepted
.'
The contents of Susan's parcel proved to be
material for a nice winter dress (which, on
measurement
,
turned out an abundance for two); and
Harry's that capital manual for Americans,
Selections
from the Works of Franklin. Those who
have returned from a journey with love-tokens in
the trunk for the dear ones at home, can
sympathize
in the pleasure and gratitude of our humble
friends.
One word more, and the affair of the journey is
finished. Twenty dollars were left of Harry's gift
after all the expenses of the journey were paid. It
cannot be doubted that, as Charlotte said, fifty
dollars is a great sum in the hands of the frugal
poor. Charlotte offered him the balance as of
course his; and, when he declined it, insisted, till
he, a little hurt, said
Why, Lottie, I should feel just as bad as they
would in old times, if they had taken back a gift
they had laid on the Lord's altar; but I'll take the
money to father to put out for you.
E 2
This was agreed on; and, being fortunately
invested
,
it amounted in a few years to a hundred
dollars; the income from it was seven a year,
and this little sum gave to our frugal and liberal
Charlotte more of the real enjoyment of property
than is often derived from productive thousands.
She had the luxury of giving, and the tranquillizing
feeling that she had something in reserve for a wet
day.
CHAPTER VI.
SHOWERS AND SUNSHINE.
We
pass over several years in the annals of our
young friends. The current of their lives had
flowed
smoothly on. Charlotte, living in rigid obedience
to the laws of health, as laid down and expounded
by Dr. , and to the laws of heaven, as applied
by her faithful conscience, had enjoyed a degree
of health and comfort that she had not anticipated.
Susan, at nineteen, was an accomplished tailoress;
and, what is most rare, her health and sunny
cheerfulness
had been in nowise impaired by her
confinement
to her needle. She was a singular union
of sweet temper and efficiency; and the only
seamstress we ever heard of, that, for year after
year, so far resisted the effects of sedentary
employment
as to sing at her work.
What is the reason, Susan May, said an
acquaintance
to her, that you are always so well
and light-hearted? Poor Sally Baker did not do as
much work as you, and yet the doctors said it was
sitting so steadily that brought on her dyspepsy;
and only see Jane Mills, she is a sight to behold!
and nothing but sewing, the doctors say.
Nothing but sewing, they may say, Adeline;
Sally Baker used to sit in her little stove-room
from morning till night, and never let in any fresh
air any more than if it were poison: poor Jane did
get a little walk when she went to her place in the
morning, but she was always behindhand with her
work; never could say no, and would set up half
the night to oblige her customers; and, after all,
was tormented to death with reproaches for broken
promises; and then, when her appetite failed, she
used to live on pies, and cakes, and such trash.
As Lottie's doctor told her, God has written laws
in our constitutions, and if we break them we must
pay for it.
But how do you manage, Susanyour cheeks
are as fresh as roses?
I began, Adeline, with an excellent
constitution
;
and Lottie, knowing the value of health,
watched over it. She made me follow her
New-York
doctor's rules about washing myself.
Washing yourself! I should like to know if
everybody don't wash themselves; I am sure
Sally Baker, and Jane Mills too, were neat as
pinks.
So they were, Adeline; but few even of neat
people know the importance of daily bathing the
whole person, and rubbing it smartly with a coarse
cloth.
That's what I call superstition.
You may call it what you please, Adeline; but
I believe that, and changing my clothes, airing the
bed, and the house, and room, have kept my cheeks,
as you say, fresh as roses. Lottie never lets me sit
more than two hours at a time at my needle; she
calls me to do a
chore
, or run of an errand. She
will not let me pass one day, rain or shine, without
exercise in the open air. Neither cold, wet, nor
heat hurts me. As to my lightheartedness, Adeline,
that's natural to me; but Lottie has helped to
keep that up too, by taking eare that I don't get
fretted at by my customers. She never would let
me make a promise that I was not sure of
performing
.
I often get my work done beforehand, and I
take pains to fit and please, and somehow I think
our Essex folks are easy to please; and smiles
beget smiles, you knowif they are pleased, I am.
And then it's such a heart-comfort to keep the
family together, now father is getting old and
feeble.
After all, Susan, I guess, said her visiter, with
an ominous contraction of the lips, you'll not
always be so lighthearted.
Maybe not; but I don't believe in borrowing
trouble.
It may come without borrowingthey say it's
a bad sign to feel too well.
I don't believe in signs, Adeline.
You maythey say everybody believes
prophecy
after it comes to pass.
Do you mean any thing in particular? asked
Susan, struck more by her companion's tone than
her words; if you do, pray speak out.
Have you seen Paulina Clark?
Paulina Clark! is she in Essex?
Yes; her mother's husband is dead, and they
have come back here to live; and they say the
old man left the widow a fortune; and Paulina is
dressed as if it was trueall in fine bombasin,
and a crape veil down to her feet, and a black bead
bag, and every thing answerable; though you
know she did not scruple to say she hated the old
man while he was alive.
I am sorry she behaves so unbecomingly; she
was always fond of outside show, Paulina; but I
remember
Harry used to say that was natural, she
was so handsome.
Don't you think it strange, Susan, that some
people can be so taken up with beauty?
Oh, I don't know; I like to look at every thing
that is beautiful.
But should you think that such a person as
Harry Aikin would put beauty before every thing?
I don't think he does, replied Susan, keeping
her eyes steadfastly to her work, and slightly
blushing.
Well, I don't know whether it is the beauty or
the fortune; but it must be one or the other, or
bothfor I am sure, in other respects, you are
far enough before Paulina Clark; and everybody
thought Harry was paying attention to you before
he left Essex.
Harry was always like a brother to Charlotte
and me, replied Susan, her voice a little
tremulous
.
Like a brother to Charlotte he might have
been; but he was more like something else to
you, and everybody thought so.
Everybody don't know every thing, rejoined
Susan, her eyes still riveted to her work, and her
heart throbbing so that it seemed to her her
companion
must hear it.
Well, now, continued the persevering gossip,
Susan May, be candid, and own, if you should
hear that Harry Aikin was going to marry Paulina
Clark, should not you feel as if he had deceived
you?
No, replied Susan, now speaking firmly, and
looking her companion full in the face; if all the
world, and Charlotte, thought Harry paid me
particular
attentionand if I sometimes had thought
so too, and if he marries Paulina Clark to-morrow,
I should think we were all mistaken, and Harry
true-hearted.
Well, you'll be put to the trial, for Paulina as
good as owned to me her expectations; but I am
sorry for your disappointment, for you can't but say
'tis a disappointment. Susan said nothing, and
her tormentor proceeded. It's nothing new nor
strange; them that has not any interest
[3]
[3]
Interest is, in rustic sense, property.
must
expect
to be slighted; and I have often heard that
when young men get to New-York, all they think
of is making money, and getting a wife that will
make a show with it; and you say yourself that
Harry thought Paulina a beauty.
Susan made no reply, and Adeline, having
succeeded
in making her uncomfortable, began to feel
very much so herself, from the effect of Susan's
quiet dignity; and, much to Susan's satisfaction,
she cut short her visit and disappeared. When
Charlotte entered a few moments after, she found
Susan's work had dropped on the floor, and she
was leaning her head on the chair and sobbing.
This was a strange sight; for, let the clouds be
ever so heavy, there was always a glimmering of
blue sky where Susan was.
Inquiries and explanations followed. Susan's
heart was turned inside out; not a thought, feeling,
prostrate hope, or piercing regret, was concealed
from Charlotte, who, though in a more subdued
manner, was scarcely less grieved than Susan.
When they could talk calmly about it, Susan
said, Come what will, I never shall blame Harry
in the least. You know how many times he has
said we were just like
sisters
to him; and it was
perfectly natural, when he went to live in New
York, he should like people that had New-York
ways.
But, Susan, it does seem to me strange that
Harry should ever fancy Paulina; she has not his
ways of thinking, or acting, or feeling.
Oh, Lottie, Paulina is handsomethey say
the best of men are carried away with beauty.
Not Harry, I am sure; and, besides, I have
heard him sayI never told you, because I did
not want to flatter youbut I heard him say, when
we went to hear Squire Willard's fourth of July
orationthe day Paulina wore that new pink satin
bonnetand somebody said Squire Willard never
took his eyes from her all the time he was
speaking
What did Harry say, Charlotte?
Harry whispered to me, and said he liked
your looks a thousand times better than Paulina's.'
Did he? did he?he would not say so now!
Maybe not. I shall always think, if he had
not gone to New-York, that would have come to
pass that we expected; but I believe, Susy, it is
very hard to keep from being worldly-minded in a
city. When I was in New-York, as I have often
told you, the chief conversation was about dress
and making money. Oh how I did long to hear
something about something profitable. You know
I never was in favour of Harry's going thereI
never liked his going into partnership with Morris
Finleyhe'd better have sat over his lapstone the
rest of his life.
But, Lottie, you forget the weakness in his
breast.
I dothat was a good reason for giving up his
trade, but not for going to New-York.
Yes, but you forget what flattering prospects
he had; and, she added, with a sigh, after his
parents' death, he had not much to keep him here;
and, having all his portion of the estate in money,
he thought it would enable him to carry on
business
to the greatest advantage in New-York. He
explained all this to our satisfaction then.
Yes; and when he told us about his plans, and
seemed to be in such a hurry to get ahead, I was
sure he was hinting at sharing with you, though
he did not seem to think it best to speak out.
I thought so too, Lottie; but I know I was
very much to blame for setting my heart that way,
when I had no more reason; and then, his always
writing and sending something by every
opportunity
to
be sure, the letters were directed to you,
but somehow they always seemed written to
me;
and then he was sure to send some present that he
knew I should like better than any thing else in
the world; but it's now a long, long time since we
have heard from him, and yet we never suspected
any thing.
No, Susy, because we never in our lives
suspected
Harry could do any but the right thing. It
will be very hard to make up our minds to see him
Paulina's husband.
Harry Paulina's husband! Oh, it's awful to
think of! But, if she were only worthy of himif
she could make him happy, I could be ashappy,
I was going to say, but that would not be true
but I could be contented for myself and thankful
for him.
Both sisters were silent for a few moments, when
Charlotte said
If we can't have things right in this world, we
can have right feelings; let us kneel down and
pray together, Susan.
Oh, yes, Lottie, that is always a comfort.
The sisters knelt, locked in each other's arms.
Charlotte was the organ of both their hearts, and
most earnestly did she pray that they might walk
together in integrity and thankfulness in
whatsoever
path it should please the Almighty to mark out
for them, even were it through a solitary
wilderness
;
that they might remember that their Lord
and Master did not promise his followers their
portion
in this world; that they might humbly and
faithfully do the duty appointed them, and not
repine
because they could not choose what that duty
should be.
She poured forth an earnest petition for their
F
best friend; that he might be directed aright; that
he might be delivered from the many evils and
temptations that surrounded him; and that she with
whom his heart was knit might have the grace as
well as the gifts of God.
When their heart-service was over, Susan said
she felt as if a load were taken from her. He,
she said to Charlotte, who commanded us to
pray for our enemies, certainly knew what was in
us: how differently we feel towards any one we
earnestly pray for!
From this time there was no apparent change
in the sisters, except that Susan pursued her
labours
with even more than usual avidity, and
sometimes a remark would escape from her that
showed the course of her thoughts; such as, I
am sure, Charlotte, of having enough to do in this
world, and that's a real comfort; for one can't be
very unhappy while there is enough to do.
That Adeline's prophecy was verified, was
obvious
;
a portion of her lightheartedness was
gone, and even Uncle Phil remarked that she
did not sing as she used to; he wished she
would; he had rather hear her than a bird.
Meanwhile
Charlotte watched her with a blending of the
sister's sympathy, and the mother's tenderness;
and daily, as she saw that Susan's resolution was
carrying her serenely through the storm, did she
offer her humble thanksgiving to Him who she
knew was the source of her strength and peace.
CHAPTER VII.
LOVE-LETTERS.
Three
weeks passed away, and nothing more
was heard of Adeline's news, save that once, when
Paulina, in Susan's presence, was bantered about
the house of Finley and Aikin, she tittered and
bridled her head, and had all the airs of a spoiled
girl who is rallied about her lover; and save that,
when Paulina, after a month's mourning, doffed her
crape bonnet and veil, and put on a pink hat with
artificial flowers, the premature transition was
imputed
to an approaching wedding, and not to the
obvious and perfectly sufficient causethe pretty
girl's extravagant love of dress.
At last Uncle Phil brought home that rare
blessing
to our simple friends, a letter, from the
postoffice
.
Here's something for you, gals, said he, as
scarce as gold now-a-daysa letter from Harry.
Oh, better than gold! said Charlotte, holding
out her hand.
No, no, it's Susy's this time; why don't you
jump, Susy?
Susan moved slowly, and took it with a
trembling
hand. Her fears, she thought, now were to
become certainty.
What are you afraid of, child? continued her
father; there can't be any bad news in it, 'cause
it's got a red wafer; and besides, Harry writ it
himself. Give it to meno, I have broken my
spectaclesyou read it, Lottie.
Yes, so do, Lottie, said Susan; I want to
see if my iron is hot.
That beats the Dutch, said Uncle Phil; if
I had twenty irons in the fire I should let them
burn to hear news from Harry.
Poor Susan! we hope our readers will excuse
her for giving a false gloss once in her life. I
can bear any thing, so she thought, if I am alone
with Lottie, and she first sees it. Her sister soon
followed her with the open letter.
Bad news, Susy, she said, but not what we
expected.
Then it can't be very bad, exclaimed Susan,
the clouds vanishing from her face; she seized
the letter, and read as follows:
My dear Susan
It is a long time since I
have written to you; but I have been in much
perplexity
and anxiety, and have been waiting to see
daylight. We have failed, Finley and I, as might
have been expected; neither of us having any
experience
in the business we undertook. As soon
as I found we could not meet our notes, I made a
thorough examination into our affairs, and found we
could just pay our debts and no more. So to-morrow
we close the concern. I have many times
regretted
I did not take Charlotte's advice, and not enter
into a business for which I was not qualified. I
would now gladly return to my trade, but
confinement
to business, and anxiety, have had an
unfavourable
effect on my health, and I am more
than ever troubled with that old pain in my breast.
I sometimes think, Susan, a sight of your sunny
face would cure me; that and all good things I
trust will come; in the meantime, patience. In
prosperity and adversity, my heart ever turns
towards
my dear Essex friends, who must believe me
their friend and brother,
Harry Aikin
.
I never did fully believe it! exclaimed Susan,
as she closed the letter.
Believe what?
Susan blushed. You know what, Lottie.
Charlotte smiled. Are you not sorry for Harry's
failure? she asked.
Oh, yessorry? Nono, I am not sorry for
any thing just at this moment, and Susan covered
her face, and wept for joy. Then, dashing off her
tears, she read the letter over again. After all,
she said, for any thing he writes here, he may
be going to marry Paulina; but I
know
he is not.
Susan's happy faith was well founded. Harry's
letter gave no details, for he never wrote his own
praises, even indirectly. Not he that
commendeth
himself is approved.
When, at the close of their second year's
partnership
,
he ascertained the unfavourable condition
of their affairs, he insisted on making them known
at once to their creditors, that they might suffer the
least possible inconvenience from the failure of
punctual payment. Morris Finley remonstrated.
He saw, or affected to see, flattering prospects
ahead; and at last, when Harry absolutely refused
to go on, Morris insisted on making a compromise
F 2
with their creditors. He adduced case upon case
where this had been done in similar circumstances,
and a pretty penny saved, and no reputation lost.
Harry would not listen to his proposition. He
said, the frequency of such proceedings was an
argument in his mind against them. He would
not add his mite to sully the mercantile reputation
of his country; and that if, by the arrangement
Finley proposed, he did not lose his good name, he
should lose his self-respect, which was still dearer
to him. The inflexibly honest man is
unmanageable
,
and Finley was at last compelled to yield.
They stopped in time to pay every penny of their
debts, and retain the respect of their creditors;
and Harry began the world anew, with fresh
vigour
,
springing from a conscience void of offence.
Morris profited by Harry's firmness. One of their
creditors, struck by the honesty of the firm, and
giving the parties equal credit for it, offered Finley
an employment which, as he afterward said, was
the first rung of the ladder on which he mounted
to fortune.
Some months passed away, and Paulina
continued
to be a belle in Essex, and flattered by young
men of every degree. The report of her
engagement
to Harry was found to have arisen from the
devotions of his partner, Morris Finley, to her.
These devotions were abated by a third marriage
of Paulina's mother, by which she put into the
hands of a young spendthrift some fifteen thousand
dollars, received from her last doting and deluded
husband. Paulina seemed at first much affected
by Finley's desertion; but, after a while, she
turned
to other lovers; and, when her mother's young
husband deserted and left her penniless, both
mother and daughter returned to New-York and
opened a milliner's shop: the mother soon after
died. It was said that Paulina removed to
Philadelphia
;
but, though unfavourable reports reached
Essex concerning her, nothing was certainly
known.
In the meantime, save two or three short letters
by private opportunities (for our friends could not
afford the luxury of post intercourse), the sisters
heard nothing from Harry till the following letter
arrived.
Dear Susan
My prospects, since the
breakup
last spring, are much improved; but particulars
in my next. All I want to know is, whether you
will share my lot with me? Pray write by return
of post, and believe me now, as you well know I
have ever been, though I never put it into words
before, your friend and true lover,
Harry Aikin
.
P. S.I know, dear Susan, you are not a
person
to take or refuse a husband for any thing
separate
from himself; but I may mislead you by what
I said above. I am still what the world calls a
poor manparticulars in my next.
Susan's first sensations on reading Harry's
letter
were those of perfect and unlimited happiness.
I always felt, she said to Charlotte, as if I
knew he loved me; and now I wonder I let
Adeline's
story trouble me for one moment.
Again and again the sisters read over Harry's
letter; Charlotte seeming, in her own quiet way,
scarcely less happy than Susan. Early in the
evening Charlotte went to her own room. Uncle
Phil made it a rule to go to bed when the fowls
went to roost (there was no faint resemblance in
their degree of intellectual life), and Susan was
left in possession of their little sitting-room to pour
out her overflowing heart in a letter to Harry. It
was a letter befitting the frank and feeling creature
who wrote it; and such a letter as any lover
would be enraptured to receive. When she went
to her room, Charlotte was not in bed, but just
rising from her knees; she smiled as she turned
towards Susan, and Susan saw that her cheeks
were wet with tears.
Why, what's the matter, Lottie? she asked.
I have been trying, Susy, to get courage to look
into the future. Her voice faltered as she
added
,
The time is coming when we must separate.
Oh, Lottie, I never thought of that! how could
I be so selfish! All the castles she had been
building in the air fell at once to the ground. Her
first impulse was to sayNo, I will never leave
you, Lottie.
But she had just written a promise to Harry to
be his; and she was silent, and quite as sorrowful
as Charlotte at the conviction that, for the first time
in their lives, their interests were divided. Hour
after hour she was restless and thoughtful; at last
she came to a conclusion, sad enough in some of
its aspects, but it tranquillized her. She nestled
up to her sister, put her arm over her, and fell
asleep, repeating to herself, It's a comfort, any
how, to resolve to do right. Well may reflection
be called an angel, when it suggests duties, and
calls into action principles strong enough to meet
them. Before Susan closed her letter, she made
the following addition:
P. S.
Dear Harry
I wrote this letter last
evening, and shall send it; for why should I, if I
could, conceal my real feelings from you? Since
we were playfellows at school, I have loved you
best, and you only, Harry; for the time to come, I
must love you only as a brother. Oh, how strange
it is, that the black and the white threads are
always
twisted together in human life. Last evening
I was so happy writing this letter; but, when I
went into the bedroom, Lottie's face was covered
with tears; and she spoke of our separation, and
all flashed upon me at once. What could she and
father do without me? They do now their full
part towards keeping the family together, but they
can neither of them bring in any thing, and they
would be obliged to look to the town for support.
Is not that awful to think of? So you see, dear
Harry, I
cannot
leave themour path is plain, and,
as dear Lottie would say, may we have grace to
walk therein. It is very dark now, Harry; but, if
we only try to do right, the day will soon break,
and grow brighter and brighter. Please don't say
one word to persuade me off my resolution, for we
are weak creatures at best, and we should stand
together, and strengthen and uphold one another.
Above all, don't say a word about my reasons to
father and Lottie; and believe me, dear Harry, not
a bit less your affectionate friend because I can't
forsake them.
Susan May
.
By return of post came the following answer
from Harry:
Dearest Susan
Forsake `father and
Lottie
!'
that you never shall. When I wrote my last,
it was only to get that blessed little word
yes
from
you, for I must make sure of my title before I laid
out the future. One thing only I am a little hurt
at. Could you think I could leave out Charlotte in
my plans?a dear sister, counsellor, and friend
she has ever been to meand your good father,
who so much needs some one to care for him? Ah,
Susan, I have had my
reflections
too; and I think
our path is plain before us, and, with good
resolution
on our part, and Charlotte's prayers to help us,
we
shall have
grace to walk therein. But I must
tell you all, and then look for your final answer.
When I invested my patrimony in the shoe
concern with Finley, I expected soon to be in a
situation to offer you my hand, and begin
house-keeping
in New-York with four members to the
family, for never once have I thought of dividing
you from your father and Lottie. I did not tell you
my hopes and plans, because I feared I should not
after that have patience to wait as long as prudence
required. One thing I am sure of, dear Susan,
from my own experiencethat a virtuous love is
the greatest earthly security a young man can have
against the temptations and dangers that beset him.
I am sure my affection for you has made me
diligent
in business, frugal, earnest in my pursuits, and
patient in my disappointments. If I had felt (which,
thank God, I never did) any inclination to forbidden
pleasures, to dangerous company, to dissipation of
any sort, the thought of you would have been a
shield to me. Knowing you and Charlotte so well,
and the memory of my excellent mother, have
given me a reverence for female virtuea belief
in the power and beauty of goodness in a woman
and to this, Susan, love naturally followsthat
pure love that is ordained by God to lead to the
holy institution of marriage.But what are my
thoughts running to? Don't laugh at me, and I
will go back to my business statements.
When I began business I took lodgings at a
carman's. He is a good friend of mine, and with
him I could live at a small expense in a quiet
family
.
I have avoided living or associating with
those who had more means than I, for that leads to
expense. I have never spent a shilling on
superfluities
,
for which I have now much reason to be
thankful; for, even if I had escaped that dreadful
load, unpaid debts, I might, like many other young
men, have acquired habits of expense on the credit
of future gains. The gains may not comethe
habits remain, like so many tormentors. When I
was asked by a friend to go to an oyster-house, or
the theatre, or the circus, or to take a bottle of
porter
,
or drink a glass of whiskey, I declined. I
knew, if I did it for my friend's sake this time, I
might do it for my own the next. I had my
treats
my pleasant thoughts of the time when I should
have a table of my own, and faces round it that I
loved. It is sure we can't have every thing in this
world, and the thing is to make up our mind what
we
must have
, and what we can do without. You
can guess
my must have
.
When I found Finley and I were going
behind-hand
,
I determined to stop short, and not, as many
do, put off the evil day, plunging deeper and deeper,
making enemies, and making plenty of work for
repentance. When our affairs were settled up I
had a hundred dollars in my pocket, and no one to
look me in the face and say I owed him a shilling,
or had wronged him of one. The next thing was
to determine on what business I should follow.
You know my breast was much weakened by
sitting
over my lapstone when I was growing fast.
It is a bad trade to put a growing boy to. I could
not return to it. A farm in one of the free western
states seemed to me the happiest lot in the world
for a poor man; but there were hardships in the
beginning, and, though you and I would not have
minded them, your father and Lottie could not have
stood them. A farm at Essex I dared not think of:
a man must have some capital and knowledge,
practice and skill, to go ahead in New-England on
a farm, and I had none of these. While I was
deliberating
,
my good friend Mr. Loomis, the carman,
determined to move to Ohio. He advised me to
take up his business, and offered to sell me his
horse and cart on very reasonable terms, and to
recommend me to his employers. There were
many reasons to decide me to take his advice. I
find exercise in the open air the best medicine for
the pain in my breast. Carting is a sure and
regular
business. I have observed that the carmen in
this city, those
whose carts are never seen standing
before groceries
, are a healthy, cheerful-looking
class of men. They go slowly but surely ahead.
They can generally manage to take their meals
with their families, and to spend all their evenings
at homea great point to a man who loves home
faces and home pleasures as I do. Some persons
think it is going down a step to go from
shop-keeping
to carting; but you and I, Susan, have our own
notions about going up and down, and both think it
is what is in a man, and not what is out of him,
that humbles or exalts him. Some think that most
genteel which brings them nearest to being idle
gentlemen; but, when I am driving through
Broadway
on my cart, do you think I would change
places with those slim-looking young men I see
parading up and down the street, looking like
tailors'
walking advertisementsbringing nothing to
passdoing nothing with the time God gives them
in this world, and gives them
for what?
Oh, it
would take a minister to answer that.
I might have gone into trade of some kind, but
I have not health to be shut up behind a counter;
and besides, in my opinion, a shop is a fitting place
for women only, they being (don't be affronted,
Susy) the weaker sex. You see now how my case
stands. I have no debts. I have good health for
the business I have chosen, industry, and a
faculty
I may boast. So I think I may marry in this
blessed
country of ours, where there is sure
employment
,
and a man is certain of getting his earnings.
Besides, dear Susan, if any thing happens to me,
you have your trade to depend upon. Give my
best love to Charlotte, and tell her, besides being
a main comfort, she will be a real help to us; for
while she is doing the light work, your needle will
be making money. If your father has any
scruples
about coming, pray tell him the rent of his
Essex place will pay for the rent of a room here
G
and save us from near neighbours we may not like.
Am I not
calculating
, Susan? But is it not better
to calculate beforehand than to grumble afterward?
I am sure I am right, so far as I can, to secure
independence
to your father and Charlotte; and if,
after all, they must take something from us, those
who are so generous in giving will be also
generous
in receiving, and they will not grudge us the
best part, it being more blessed to give than to
receive
.
There is one thing I can scarcely bear the
thoughts oftaking you all from that pleasant little
spot in Essex, where you have
riches
for the eye
that all the money in New-York cannot buy
in
the
cityplenty of sweet air and pure water;
[4]
[4]
Has any one ever calculated the amount of wealth and
comfort to be produced to the labouring classes by the
introduction
of pure water into the city of New-York? Health and
cleanliness are sources of wealth, and of comfort
inappreciable
.
and
your garden, and your little courtyard, with its
rose-bushes, morning-glories, pionies, and marvels
of Peru. But, after all, dear Susan, there are
feelings
worth giving up the very best of outward
things for; and if we secure affection, and
kindness
,
and so forth, we sha'n't have made a bad
bargain
of it, shall we? We may be what the world
calls poor, and miscals, in my estimation. Let
us begin, in the fear and love of God, with a
determination
to do our dutyrich in love for one
another, and at peace with all men; and if worst
comes to worst, why, that will be
outside
poverty.
I do not fear it, do you? Answer this without fail
by return of post. Much duty and love to your
(my?) father and Charlotte, and believe me, till
death, your friend and lover,
Harry Aikin
.
P. S.I was so taken up with one subject that
I forgot to mention that Finley was married last
evening to a Miss Nichols. Her father entered
into speculation last winter, and is said to be rich.
Finley says he never gave Paulina Clark reason to
expect to marry him; perhaps not in words; but,
the old proverb is, `actions speak loudest.' To my
mind, a man who
attends
to a girl, and then quits
her, adds hypocrisy to falsehood. I foresaw how
this matter would end when I heard that Paulina's
mother had made that
third
marriage. Finley
would have liked a handsome wife, but he
must
have
a rich one. He has set out in the world for
what he calls the
main chance;
I have my
main
chance
too, and that depends on you. Poor
Paulina
!
But I'll not tell bad news (which may not be
true)
in this
letter.
H. A.
Morris Finley and Harry Aikin had begun life
with objects diametrically opposite, and were
destined
to illustrate that saying, as true now as when,
ages ago, it was first uttered:
There is that
maketh himself rich, yet hath nothingthere is that
maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches
CHAPTER VIII.
A PEEP INTO THE POOR RICH MAN'S HOUSE.
As
our readers may have anticipated, Susan at
once entered into Harry's views; and, in a short
time, she and her family were transferred to a part
of a small house in Broome-street, in New-York.
One room served as kitchen, parlour, and
bedroom
.
It was furnished only with articles of the
first necessity. There was a snug little bedroom
for Uncle Phil, which he said suited him exactly;
and a comfortable, good-sized one for Charlotte,
with a neat rag carpet on it, because Lottie
suffered
with cold feet; and a fireplace in it, for
Lottie must have a fire when she had sick turns;
and two windows, for all Lottie's living was fresh
air; and the only bureau and the only
rocking-chair
were in Charlotte's room, because, as she
said, Susy had always some good reason at hand
for giving her the best of every thing.
Our friends were undeniably what the world
calls poor. But they had affection, intelligence,
temperance, contentment, and godliness. Were
they poor? We shall see. In the meantime, let
us see if there is not some misuse of terms in this
world. Morris Finley had got in on the world.
He had so far secured his
main chance
, that he
was engaged in profitable business. He lived in
a good house, fashionably furnished; and his wife,
like the wives of other flourishing young
merchants
,
dressed in expensive materials, made in
the latest fashion. Neither Morris nor his wife
was vicious. They were
only
selfish and
ostentatious
,
with unfurnished minds, and hearts as
empty as their purses were full.
Husband, said Mrs. Finley to her partner,
who had just come home from Wall-street to
dinner
,
his mind engrossed with some
unaccountable
rise in the stocks. Husband, mother has been
here.
Well, what of that?
She has given up her house.
What of that?
Why, you know what of that as well as I do;
she does not know what she is to do next.
We must premise that Finley's father-in-law
had made some unfortunate, as well as fortunate
speculations; had died, and left his wife and an
unmarried daughter penniless.
I am sure I cannot say what she is to do next,
replied Finley; she is lucky to have one
daughter
well provided for. What does she propose?
She did not propose any thing. She sat and
cried the whole morning.
Of course she cannot expect to have a home
here.
Of course not. I told her, said I, `Mother, if
I were to ask husband to invite you here, we could
not accommodate you, for we have not a room to
spare: you know we must eat in the basement, to
keep the parlours in order for company; and in the
second story there is only the nursery and our
bedchamber
;
G 2
and one of the third-story rooms we
must keep for a spare room; and, when Sabina Jane
gets to be a little older, she must have the back
upper
chamber; and so,' said I, `mother, you see, if
husband were perfectly willing, it is impossible.'
She could not have expected it.
Oh, no, she did not; but, then, a mother is a
mother, you know, and I did not wish to hurt her
feelings.
I presume, my dear, Helen Maria can get a
place as governess or teacher in a school; I heard
her say she had attended to music and painting,
and French, and so on, at Mrs. 's school, for
the last six years.
So she has, husband; but, bless you! you
know how girls learn things at school, and she
never expected to have to teach.
Expect or not expect, I'd get my money's
worth out of these schools. I saw, on your
father's
books, three hundred dollars a year paid for
Helen Maria's schooling for the last six years, and
this is what it has come to. Can't she teach
geography
,
or arithmetic, or some of them useful
branches?
No, she never was fond of the useful
branches
;
she had quite a pretty taste for music and
painting, but then people are required to understand
them so well to teach them. No, I don't see as
Helen Maria can earn any thing but by
embroidering
muslin; she does that beautifully; and if
there was only a place where work might be sold
without it being known where it came from, she
might earn considerable, and no one be the wiser
for it.
Nonesense, wife! We have not yet got above
our relations' working for their living, though you
may not be obliged to. Why can't your mother
take a boarding-house, and then Helen Maria
might assist her?
Oh! Helen Maria can't do any kind of
housework
;
besides, she is delicate, you know. Now
mother was brought up to it; and when I proposed
a boarding-house, she said if she had any security
to offer for her rent
Ah! there's the rub! I hope she don't expect
me to offer; for you know, my dear, I make it an
invariable rule never to endorse, but in the way of
business, for those who endorse for me.
What is to be done, husband, if she can't get
into any way of supporting herself? She must
live, you know.
And I must support her, hey?
No, I did not say that; but we can't let her
suffer. What would people say?there are always
enough to talk, you know.
Yes, yes: well, I suppose I must advance the
first quarter's rent, or something towards it. Oh!
a thought strikes me; I know a house that will
just suit, belonging to some old maid or widow, or
somebody that lives up the country. The man that
has the care of it ain't particular about security.
I'll make the bargain for hersave her at least a
hundred dollars. That's just as good to her as if
I took the money out of my purse and put it into
hers. I am glad to do your mother a good turn
now and then in this way. I ain't one that holds
to shirking poor relations.
Nor I, I am sure, and I told mother so;
but I told her not to look to you; for, says I,
mother, you know we have a very expensive
family
,
and there are certain things we must have,
and husband says he will always keep on the safe
side.
Yes, trust Morris Finley for that. Folks that
mean to go ahead in the world must avoid
unnecessary
expenses. Has the man been here about
the curtains?
Yes; and I find the fawn, with blue borders,
cost, for each window, twenty dollars more than
the others.
Bless my soul! how is that?
The fixtures are very showy and expensive
I don't make a point of thosebut the blue and
fawn is such a lovely contrast, and such a match
for my carpet. If there's any thing I do care about,
it's a match.
But the price, wife, is enormous.
But it is not more than Mrs. Johnson Smith
gave for hers.
Are you sure of that?
Positive; Miss Saltus told me so, and Miss
Saltus made them up. I should not depend on
what Mrs. Johnson Smith said, for she always
makes it out that her things cost more than
anybody
else's; but I can rely on Miss Saltus.
Well, if that's the case, take the blue and
fawn. I hope I can afford what Johnson Smith
can; but mind and make your bargain with that
Saltus woman before hand; work is slack just now,
and she can't afford to lie by with that old blind
mother on her hands. Get your work done as
well and as cheap as you can; for, remember,
we
must avoid all unnecessary expenses
. But what
keeps the dinner, my dear?
I am sure I don't know, my dear; I have been
out making visits all the morning. Servants are
good for nothing now-a-daysalways trifling away
their time.
What ails Sabina Jane? seems to me she does
nothing but bawl.
Mrs. Finley opened the door to inquire, and in
rushed a pale little girl, with a bit of plum-cake in
her hand.
Take care, Judy, said the mother, picking up
the crumbs the child profusely scattered; you
should not let Sabina Jane come into the parlour
it's no place for children.
She would come, ma'am.
Oh, Sabina Jane, my darling, go back to the
nursery, that's a good child.
I won't, I won't!
Mrs. Finley, in a low voice to the nurseCoax
her, Judytell her you'll take her out to walk.
I can't take her out, ma'ammy foot is lame.
Oh, only just tell her so, to pacify her. Stop,
Sabina Jane, and listen to mother; Sabina Jane
shall go out walking in Broadway, and have on her
pretty velvet cap, and her cloak, all trimmed with
pinkthere, that's a good girl! now she'll go with
Judy. Get out her things, Judymake her look
like a little beauty!
The little dupe returned to the nursery, and in
two minutes was bawling louder than ever, having
been quieted just that time by her mother's
precious
lesson in lying and vanity.
CHAPTER IX.
A PEEP INTO THE RICH POOR MAN'S HOUSE.
Seven
years had not passed over without those
precious accumulations to Aikin that constitute the
poor man's wealth; for, save a conscience void of
offence, there is no treasure comparable to healthy,
bright, well-trained children. Our friend Harry
and his wife had kept the even tenour of their way
no uncommon event had happened to them; but,
as the river of life glides through a varied country,
the aspect of their's now varied from what it was
when we last saw them.
The floor of the room was partly covered with a
carpet, and the part visible as clean as hands
could make it. It was summer, and the blinds
were closed, admitting only light enough to enable
the persons within to carry on their occupations.
Uncle Phil is sitting by the half-opened window,
with a year-old baby on his lap, telling over on its
toes that charming lyric, this pig went to market,
and that pig stayed at homeAunt Lottie was
preparing a pot of wholesome soup, which, like a
judicious housewife, having boiled the day before,
she was freeing from every particle of fata little
girl, six years old, was tacking worsted binding
together
for Venitian blinds, whereby she got from
a manufacturer (working only at odd intervals)
half a dollar per week; and at the same time
teaching a sister, something more than two years
younger, the multiplication-tableSusan Aikin sat
by, her vigilant eye seeing every thing, and her
kind voice interposing, as often as the wants or
claims of the children rendered her interference
necessary. Her most difficult duty seemed to be
to keep in due order a restless, noisy little fellow,
William, the twin brother of her eldest girl, whom
she was teaching to write, while at the same time
she was tailoring and instructing in her art a young
girl, who had just set the last stitch in a vest of the
most costly material, and was holding it up for
inspection
;
a slight anxiety, till she heard the
approving
word, tempering her conscious success.
Susan scrutinized every part of it, every seam,
button-hole
,
and button; and then said
There's not a fault in itI could not do one
better myself, Agnes.
Agnes burst into tears; Anne looked up from
her work inquiringly; little Mary exclaimed,
Such a big girl cry! Willie said, She is not
really
crying; and the baby stretched out its
neck, and put up its lips to offer a kiss of
consolation
,
which Agnes took, smiling through her tears,
and saying, Oh, I'm only crying because your
mother has been so good to me!
Well, shouted Willie, that's a funny thing
to cry for!
That was not all, Willie, said his mother;
Agnes cries because she has been good herself.
That's funnier yet; we never cry only when
we are naughty.
Mrs. Aikin solved the riddle, and so will we,
Agnes was the eldest child of a worthy and very
poor neighbour of Mrs. Aikin. Her father had
been disabled for some months, by falling from a
building, and had recently died; her mother had
lost her health from over-exertion. Agnes had an
idiot sister, and two brothers too young to render
the family any assistance. Mrs. Aikin, foreseeing
the distress of the family after they should have
exhausted the father's earnings, and knowing that
Agnes was a diligent and good girl, and had been
well taught plain sewing in a public school, offered
to instruct her in making vests, a very profitable
business to those who are skilled in it, and can
command work from the first merchant tailors.
There were some obstacles in the way: Agnes
could only be spared from home at odd intervals,
and often only at times very inconvenient to Susan
Aikin; but who, as Susan said, would ever do any
good in this world if they made mountains of
molehills
?
Those who saw her multiplied cares, her
bee-like industry, would rather have said she
made molehills of mountains. She always
received
Agnes with a smile, always found a quiet
corner for her, and made leisure to attend to her.
Agnes, seeing the efforts and sacrifices her kind
friend made for her, set the right value upon the
good she was obtaining, and performed her part
with fidelity.
Many complaints are made of the low rates of
women's wagessome just, no doubt; but, for the
most part, they are paid according to their
capacity
.
A well-qualified seamstress, tailoress, or
milliner
,
can, except in very rare cases, obtain certain
employment and good pay: a half-taught and
careless worker must take her chance for
slopwork
,
at low wages. Susan Aikin could at all
times command work from the most respectable
houses, was sure of the highest wages, and
incidental
favours that she knew how to turn to
account
.
Now, Agnes, my child, she had said on
the day previous to this on which we have
introduced
her young friend, here is a trial vest for
you; I have got leave from my employers to put
it into your hands; you must set every stitch in
it; and, if it is done to their satisfaction, you are to
have as much of their best work as you can do,
which is as good as a promise of six dollars a
week to youa sure support for your poor mother,
and helpless sister, and little brothers. Better, my
child, to trust to diligent, skilful hands, than to
widows' societies, and assistance societies, and so
on; leave those for such as can get nothing better,
while we use the means of independence that
Providence has given us.
But if I should fail, Mrs. Aikin?
Why, then there is one comfort left, we can
try again; but you will not fail.
Thus stimulated and encouraged, Agnes set to
work, and, as has been seen, accomplished her task,
and no wonder that she shed tears of joy when it
was done. Which, we would ask, was happiest
which
richest;
he who paid fifteen dollars for the
vest, or she who earned the dollar by making it,
and thereby cheered the hearts of the desolate, and
brought comfort and light to a dreary home? or,
which is happiest
richest;
she who is lapped in
luxury, and is every day seeking some new and
expensive pleasure, or those who, like our friend
H
Mrs. Aikin, in some obscure place, are using their
faculties and seizing their opportunities of doing
good, never to be known and praised by the world,
but certainly recorded in the book of life?
While the vest was passing round to be
examined
and praised by Aunt Lottie, Uncle Phil, and
all, for their joys were in common in this little
family, Aikin entered, and had his share in the
general pleasure; but his brow soon clouded.
Children are quick readers of faces they love.
What is the matter, father? asked Willie;
is that ugly pain in your breast come again?
No, something worse, Willie; a pain in my
heart.
What
is
the matter? asked Susan, anxiously.
Every eye now turned to Aikin.
It's poor M'Elory's troubles again. He called
me in as I was passing. There lay his wife on
the floor, dead drunk. Returning from the grocer's,
she slipped down the cellar stairs, and is so black
and bruised, her head so swollen, you would not
know her. The children were crying, and he
wringing his hands and saying, `I can bear it no
longer.' He, every week of his life, earns more
than I do, and this bad woman wastes it. This
comes of marrying a poor, ignorant, ill-brought-up
girl, who had nothing but a pretty face to
recommend
her. M'Elory says his children are going
to destruction. She makes them play truant, sends
them out begging, puts lies into their mouths,
and, last and worse than all, gives them rum to
drink.
Dear me! dear me! exclaimed Susan, what
can be done for them?
He says but one thinghe must turn her
adrift; he has forgiven and forgiven till he is tired
of it.
Ah, there is but one Being that is never tired
of forgiving!
The poor fellow has been very patient, though
but he says, for his children's sake, he must break
up; they are going to ruin. He has engaged
places for them all but little Sam; no one is
willing
to take him for the price M'Elroy can pay.
Not willing to take Sam, father! interrupted
Mary; I should think they would be willingest
of all to take Sam.
Why, Mary?
Because he wants taking care of most.
Ah, Mary, that's a rule few go by. It's no
joke, continued Aikin to his wife, for the poor
fellow to board out himself and four children, for
there's not one of them yet old enough to earn his
own living.
Sam's a bright boy, said Uncle Phil.
And a poor, sickly little fellow, that's been
cruelly
neglected, said Aunt Lottie.
It would be a comfort to see if care and
management
would not cure him, said Susan Aikin.
M'Elroy can pay half a dollar a week, which
I think will pay for all the poor little fellow can
consume in his present state, said Aikin.
It is an opportunity, said Susan, seeming to
think aloud.
What did you say, Susan? asked her
husband
.
Nothing; I was only thinking it was an
opportunity
.
Her husband smiled. Well, she
added, I
am
superstitious about that: the
opportunities
are given, and it is our business to improve
them, and it always makes me feel bad when I
have let one slip by: the same never offers twice.
Speak out plain, wife: what do you mean?
It was now Susan's turn to smile. You know
what I mean, Harry. It would not be right for us
to run into any expense for a neighbour's child,
but care and kindness we can givethey cost us
nothing. Lottie is the best of doctors, and I think,
among us, we could cure up little Sam; and that
would be a comfort.
But, asked her husband, are you not afraid
to bring a child that has been in the hands of that
bad woman among our children?
No, our children all pull one way; and if they
see any thing wrong we shall know, for they are
true and open as the day. Poor little Sam has not
been sent into the streets like the other children;
and, if he has caught some of their bad habits,
surely they may be cured in one so young. We
have no money to give away, husband; but of such
as we have we can give, and hope for the Lord's
blessing upon the gift.
The whole family, old and young, were of
Susan's mind. The little boy was brought into the
shelter of their fold; and soon, under the kind and
judicious management of Lottie and Susan, his
unstrung, weak, dropsical figure, was braced to
health and activity; his eye brightened, and his
sallow cheek changed to the natural hue of
childhood
.
Good principles and good habits were
implanted
,
and good feeling cherished; and he who
must have perished in a miserable childhood, or
have dragged on a mischievous, or, at best, a
worthless
existence, held up his head in after life among
his fellows, a prosperous, useful, and respected
citizen.
Truly did Susan Aikin say, God gives the
opportunity; and well did she improve it!
CHAPTER X.
THE RICH POOR MAN'S CHARITIES.
Years
to the thirteenth of their marriage glided
on without any marked change in the condition of
the Aikins. Industry, frugality, skill, and sound
judgment, saved them from dependance and wants.
But they had a large family to supply; two
unproductive
members, as we were about to designate
Uncle Phil and Charlotte, but this would be injustice
to them. Charlotte's thoughtfulness, and her doing
the
light chores
, saved Susan many an hour, which
she turned to account at her trade; and Uncle Phil's
skill in baby-tending proved also a great economy of
the mother's time. There are certain persons in
this world that are most happily adapted to the
miscellaneous office of baby-tending. They are
your people that don't care about bringing
any thing
to pass
indisposed to great exertions certainly,
but not positively lazy; easy-tempered and
kind-hearted
,
such as prefer the one-horse chaise
travelling
to the locomotion of a railroadsuch was our
H 2
good Uncle Phil. But with all Aikin's diligence,
and all his wife's efficiency, their inevitable expenses
exhausted their income, save that a small sum was
husbanded each year as a provision in case of
sudden
calamity. We confess that our friends
remained
poor, in the common acceptation of the
word; but whether those were really so who had
few desires ungratifiedwho were enjoying the
essential blessings of lifewho were giving their
children, in the
home school
, the very best
education
,
and whose humble habitation was the abode
of health and contentment, we leave for those to
decide who have felt that these goods riches
cannot
buy.
William, the eldest boy, was one morning
standing
by his father's cart in Pearl-street, when his
attention was attracted by a poor man, who, in
coming out of the door of a warehouse, staggered,
and, catching by the iron railing, sunk down on the
step. Half a dozen boys gathered about him, one
crying, He's top-heavy! Another, Try it again,
old fellow!Drunken rascal! muttered a
gentleman
,
passing along.
I am not drunk, faintly replied the old man.
What
is
the matter, sir? asked William,
drawing
near, as the other boys, perceiving their mistake
slunk away.
I am starved, child!
William looked round for his fatherhe was in
the warehouseand the boy ran into an
oystercellar
,
and expending his only shilling, returned
with a bit of bread and a saucer of hot oysters,
which the poor man devoured as if he were indeed
starving. Then lifting his grateful eye to William,
and meeting his earnest and pitiful glance, he
burst into tears. At this moment Aikin appeared,
and William whispered to him what had occurred.
Aikin recognised the man as a person he had
frequently
met during the preceding week inquiring
for work; he put a few questions in a friendly
tone, that inspired the stranger with confidence;
and, in return, he told him that he had been a poor
English curatethat many years ago his youngest
daughter had married imprudently and come to
Americathat the last he had heard of her was
four years before, when he received a hasty,
illegible
scrawl, in which she informed him that she
was a widow, and had embarked on board the ship
from which she then wrote to return to himthat
her child exhibiting symptoms of varioloid, she was
ordered off the ship, and knew not what was to
become
of her. The father, after waiting till, as he
said, he could live and wait no longer, had
converted
his little property into money, and come
with an elder daughter in search of the lost one.
He had arrived here at the beginning of the
inclement
seasonhe had obtained no intelligence
of his childhis eldest daughter, whose
efficiency
and fortitude he mainly relied on, took a cold,
with which she languished through the winter, and
had died two weeks before. His health was broken,
his heart gone, and his little stock of money
expended
to the last farthing. Hunger had driven him
forth to seek employment to support a life that had
become a burden to him, but employment he could
not find; and, when I sunk down here, he
concluded
,
I was glad the time of release had come;
but when that little fellow spoke kindly to me, I
felt as if Providence had not forsaken me.
Aikin listened to the story, and was silent.
What do you mean to do about him?
whispered
William, rightly interpreting his father's
perplexity
.
I hardly know, Willie.Oh, thought he,
if Mr. Beckwith were only in townhe has
money, and time, and a heart for every one's
need!
After a moment's consideration, he determined
to go into the warehouse, not so much to apply to
its proprietor, Morris Finley, for aid, as to consult
with some gentlemen as to what aid had best be
extended to the stranger. One suggested the
hospital
.
There was no reason for taking him there,
as he had no disease. The almshouse was
proposed
by another. Aikin replied, that a trifling
present succour might save him from the
degradation
of public charity, and in a short time he might
earn his own support. Finley, after rummaging
his pockets, said he had no change; and then
added
,
probably in reply to the contemptuous
expression
of Aikin's face, that there was no knowing
but the man was an impostor, and, besides, he made
it a rule never to give to strangers.
It is a good time to make acquaintance with
a stranger, said Aikin, when he is dying of
starvation
.
Finley turned on his heel, and busied
himself in giving directions to his clerks, who but
half concealed the smile of satisfaction which
hovered
on their lips at the good rub, as they called
it, their master had got from Aikin. A gentleman
standing by gave Aikin five dollars, saying, You
have good judgmentemploy this as you think
best for the poor man: I have money, but no time,
to give.
And what time has a New-York merchant, who
is making his thousands and tens of thousands,
engrossed as he is with projects and calculations,
and beset by the hopes and fears that accompany
the accumulation of riches, and their possible
losswhat time has he for the claims of human
brotherhood?what time to obey the injunction,
Bear ye one another's burdens?what time to
imitate his Divine Master in going about doing
good?what time to seek the lost, raise the
fallen
,
strengthen the weak, among his brethrenthe
children of one Fathertravellers to one home?
He may find time for a passing alms, but for
protection
,
for advice, for patient sympathy, for those
effective charities that his knowledge, station, and
influence put within his power,
he has no time
.
For what consideration does he cede this
irredeemable
treasure, time? And when conscience
shall ask, When thou wert conceiving schemes
of unlimited wealth, examining invoices, and
counting gains,
where was thy brother?
will he not
wish to have been the
rich poor
man who, in the
name of Jesus, stretched forth his hand to that
neglected brother?
When Aikin returned to the steps, he
communicated
the merchant's bounty to the stranger, and
added, If you will get on to my cart, and go to
my house, my wife and I will try to make you
comfortable for the present, and look out for
employment
for you against you get your strength.
The stranger could not speak. His face, as he
feebly moved towards the cart, expressed more
than words could.
Where
can
he sleep, father? whispered
William
,
anticipating some little home perplexities.
I don't know, my son; but mother will
contrive
.
Oh, so she willmother always does contrive
every thing for everybody.
Most,
most
happy are those children who have
William's confidence in the willing, active
benevolence
of their parents. The Aikins had hit on the
right and only sure mode of teaching goodness.
Who upon 'arth has Harry Aikin brought home
with him? exclaimed Uncle Phil, who, as Aikin's
cart halted before the door, sat at the window, as
usual, trotting the baby on his knee. Susan Aikin
was busy at her needle, and did not look up till
Anne exclaimed
It's some poor gentleman, mother!
She then rose, and seeing her husband aiding
the stranger, and William standing with the door
wide open, his kind heart shining through his
bright face, she opened the inner door, drew
Charlotte's
rocking-chair to the fire, threw a dry stick
into the stove, and received the stranger with that
expression of cheerful, sincere hospitality, which
what is called high breeding only imitates.
Sarvent, sir, said Uncle Phil, who would have
been nowise disconcerted if Aikin had brought
home a regiment. Make your manners, Phil.
Little Phil crowed out his welcome, while Aunt
Lottie warmed a cup of her particularly nice gruel,
a cordial she saw the poor man wanted.
Aikin took his wife aside to explain the
stranger's
condition and wants; this done, I knew,
Susan, he said, it would be a comfort to you to
do what you could for the poor man.
Indeed is it, Harry, and no great trouble
either
;
for you know we have plenty of beds and
bedding, and, now poor old Mr. Smith is gone, they
can spare us our cot, and I can make him up a nice
comfortable bed in father's room; nothing ever
puts father out.
Nor father's daughter, I think; and that is why
I am sometimes afraid I shall impose on you.
Impose on me, Harry! in giving me an
opportunity
to do a kindness! That is our chief
comfort
.
There are certain persons who do services for
their fellow-creatures as some children learn
lessons
as
a task prescribed by authority. This
was not Susan's way. She never separated the
idea of duty from the deep abiding happiness that
resulted from its performance.
CHAPTER XI.
AN ORPHAN GIRL.
Mr. Barlow
(Barlow was the stranger's name)
soon revived under the influence of the Aikins
hospitalities. As he himself expressed it,
kindness
was the medicine he wanted; and every day
he felt its healing power.
I am not two shillings out of pocket in a week
for the poor man, said Aikin; and I think,
Susan
,
we take as much pleasure in seeing him
refreshed
at our table, as the rich do in their
dinner-parties
.
To tell the truth, Susan, though I suppose
no one but you would believe it, I never did wish
to change conditions with them.
Nor I, I am sure; they must have a great deal
of trouble. I often pity them. Not but that I am
willing to take trouble, but then it must be for
something to be got out of it.
This remark of Susan's led her husband to
suggest
a project which, after various emendations
from her, was soon after carried into effect. They,
like all good parents, rich or poor, were steadfastly
intent on the advancement of their children. It
has been already seen how much our friends were
benefited by their early educationthe common
and paramount blessing of New-England. They
felt their children to be the gift of God, and, being
religious and reasoning beings, they fully realized
their responsibility to Him for the use and
improvement
of this best of his gifts. They were
sufficiently acquainted with the condition, laws,
institutions, and capabilities of their country, to
know how to train their children to profit by them,
and, when they became men and women, to reflect
honour on them. They sent them to school; but
they well knew that schools could do but a small
part towards their education. Home was the
school in which they were to be taught, from the
first year of their existence, by day and by night,
in sickness and in health, and their parents were
to
set them the copies
which they were to follow.
Besides instruction in virtues and manners, which,
if not learned at home, are learned nowhere, they
improved every opportunity of adding to their
knowledge. Henry Aikin often devoted a leisure
moment to looking over a book-stall, where
valuable
second-hand books are frequently to be
obtained
at low prices. He had lately purchased a
work on natural history, with good plates, and he
now proposed that Mr. Barlow, who was well
acquainted
with the subject, should give the children
some instruction upon it; which, with the aid of
the books, might be made very atfractive to them.
Susan suggested, that it was a pity such an
opportunity
should be confined to their children, and
mentioned two or three worthy families whose
children might be included. This led to an
extension
of the plan; and it was finally concluded to
propose a social meeting, to be held successively
at the different families included. Mr. Barlow was
to give a sort of lecture, and, after that was over,
the evening was to be passed socially. If we
I
only had that little back room, said Susan, we
should want for nothing. The little back room
was an apartment in a back building, with an
entrance
from the landing of the first flight of stairs.
It was neatly finished, had a communication of its
own with the yard, and a closet, large enough for
a bed, attached to it. The Aikins had long wished
to add it to their narrow accommodations, and more
than ever recently, for it had been rented to a
woman who, from her extreme shyness, her being
visited only occasionally by a person who
called
himself her husband, and her having a little girl
dressed in tawdry and shabby finery, they deemed
a very undesirable neighbour. Uncle Phil, who
was the kindest-hearted gossip in the world, but
still a gossip, retained his country propensity to
know all about his neighbours' affairs. He was
much puzzled by the tenant of the back parlour,
and day after day repeated to Charlotte and Susan,
Who can that woman be? I can't get sight of
her face under that dum deep bonnet and veil;
but her walk looks natural, and always puts me in
mind of some of our Essex folks.
That's odd, Lottie, said Susan; don't you
remember my telling you one day, when she was
calling her little girl, that her voice sounded
natural
?
Yes; but she can't be any one we ever knew.
I am sure I hope not.
I hope not, too, said Uncle Phil, but I do
feel for the little girl; she looks so wishful after
our children, and she's pretty spoken.
I feel for her, too, said Susan, but I must
know something more about her before I should
feel it to be right to let the children associate with
her.
Uncle Phil was determined, as far as in him
lay, to remove this objection, and to make the
most of the first opportunity of finding out
something
about the litle stranger; so, the first mild
sunny day, he stationed himself at the street door,
with the baby in his arms, sure that the little girl,
who frequently passed in and out, would be
attracted
by the natural affinities of childhood. She
soon appeared, with a pitcher in her hand, on her
way to the pump. She would have been
extremely
pretty, but that she wanted the foundation of all
childhood's beautyhealth. Her eye was
sunken
;
her cheeks pale, and lips blue; and she
looked peaked and cold. Her dress was thin and
shabby. She had a soiled silk frock; slippers
down at the heel; a faded silk bonnet, with
artificial
flowers; a carnelian necklace and ear-rings,
and a ragged French shawl. A sad contrast was
she to Anne and Ruth Aikin, who, in their
schooldress
,
with a pail between them, were preceding
her at the pump. They were dressed in factory
frocks, and aprons with pockets; gingham hoods;
warm gray cloaks; calf-skin shoes, and nice
woollen
stockings, of Aunt Lottie's knitting. On they
ran, chattering and giggling, while the little
shivering
stranger lagged alone behind them. I
know very well, Mary, said Anne, in reply to
something from her sister, mother don't like us
to keep company with girls she don't know; but,
then, I know mother would not object to our just
speaking kindly to her: I'll tell mother about it.
Little girl, raising her voice, we've filled our
pailhold up your pitcher, and I'll pump that full.
The courtesies of childhood have more expression
than form. The stranger held up the pitcher till
the water ran over it, and followed the little girls
back with a lighter step. As she reached the
door-step, an impatient voice called, Juliet!
Juliet
!
She ran up the stairs, set her pitcher
within
the door, and eagerly returned, apparently in the hope of again seeing the little Aikins; but they
had gone in, and no one was at the door but Uncle
Phil and the baby. So, your name is Juliet, is
it? he asked, eagerly seizing on a starting-point
to begin his acquaintance.
Yes, sir, replied Juliet, gently taking the hand
the baby had stretched to snatch her ear-ring.
Juliet what? pursued Uncle Phil.
Juliet Smith, sir.
Smith? ejaculated Uncle Phil, disappointed
at hearing a name that afforded no clew.
Yes, Smithat least mother's name is Smith.
Then yours is, sartin.
No, it is not, sirshe is not my
real
mother.
Is not? do tell! what is your real mother's
name?
My own mother is dead, sir.
Well, what was her name, child?
I don't know, sir; take care, baby, don't pull
my ear so.
Be done, Philpoor little captain, he never
sees such notionsour gals don't wear them. But
did you never ask your own mother's name?
Yes, sir; and she says she'll tell me all about
her one of these days.
Are you sure she is dead?
Sure, sir!I saw her buried up in the ground.
The tears poured down the child's cheeks.
I declare, said Uncle Phil, brushing his hand
across his own eyes, and then drawing Juliet close
to himis that person you call mother kind to
you? he asked.
Sir!almost always she issometimes she is
dreadful sleepyand sometimes sheshe don't feel
welland then she gets angry very easy.
Was your own mother kind to you?
My own mother!indeed, indeed she was
always.
Poor little child! I feel for you. How long
since she died?
I don't know; I know it was winter-time, and
we had not any wood, when Mrs. Smith came into
our roombut it was not last winterand I don't
know when it was.
Was this woman up stairs any kin to you?
No, she did not even know mother before that
timeshe was angry about something when she
came in; but, when she saw how sick mother was,
and that I was lying close to her to warm her, for
I told you we had not any wood, sir, she seemed
very sorry for mother, and she criedand mother
sent me out of the roomand she took care of
mother almost all the time till she diedit was not
long, thoughfor I remember there was a bit of
the loaf of bread she brought lying by mother when
she died. Now I am afraid she is getting sick
just as mother was, for she coughs all night.
Before Uncle Phil had time for any more
interrogatories
,
Juliet was again called, and he went
I 2
into his daughter's room to enjoy the next best
pleasure to hearing news, viz.telling it.
So, you see, he said, concluding his story,
it was not strange I felt a kind of yearning
towards
that poor child; and since she's turned to
be an orphan-like, neglected little body, I hope,
gals (to Charlotte and Mrs. Aikin), you'll take her
by the hand.
Never were persons more ready to listen to
such counsel. Mrs. Aikin had forbidden all
intercourse
with the forlorn little stranger, but the case
now assumed a new aspect; and, when Aikin came
home to dinner, their duty to the child was
discussed
in a committee of the whole family; Uncle
Phil, as was his wont, spoke first. His thoughts
were all on the surface, and, as soft substances
easily
melt, they naturally ran into words.
It's my firm opinion, he said, that this
Miss
Smith
is not a great deal better than she should be
I always suspect your people that ain't sociable
and open-hearted; and what kind of a husband is
that she's got, that comes slinking in, his face
buried in the cape of his cloak? They'll just bring
up that childand she's a capital child, I tell you
to destruction. I feel as if you ought to do
something about it.
What can we do, Susan? said Aikin,
appealing
to his wife.
I don't know; but, as father says, I feel as if
it would be a comfort to do something.
I have two pairs of nice warm stockings that
would about fit her, said Aunt Lottie, and our
children are supplied for the winter.
Oh, mother! said Anne, mayn't she have
one of my warm frocks?I can do with one, and
she looks so shivery!
And, father, said William, if you will only
give her the rest, I will give her my four shillings
towards a pair of good shoes. I saw her coming
in the other day, with her feet so wet and cold
that she could not help crying.
Mother, said little Ruth, can't you and
Aunt Lottie contrive her such a petticoat as you
made for me, of old pieces, with cotton quilted
between them? you may take my patchwork for
the lining.
My friends, said Mr. Barlow, who sat
listening
with extreme interest to these promptings of
the heart, may I put in my mite? Cannot the
little girl come into our evening class? She may
gain something from my instructions, and she
cannot
fail to profit by intercourse with your children.
The Aikins most cheerfully acquiesced in this
suggestion. The warm garments, Susan said,
would only be a present comfort, but a good done
to her mind would be lasting; and she feared no
evil to arise to her children while their intercourse
with the little stranger was under her own eye.
Blessed are those families who call within their
fold some of the wandering lambs of the flock!
One more point was to be gained. The
insuperable
obstacle to conferring a benefit often arises
from the party to be benefited. Mrs. Aikin was
desirous to see Juliet's present protector. Some
curiosity, we do not deny, she felt to see, face to
face, the person whose gait and voice had struck
her father and herself as familiar; but she was
mainly anxious to ascertain the child's condition
and prospects. She therefore intercepted Juliet
in the entry, and asked her to tell her mother she
wished to speak with her. Juliet returned
immediately
,
saying, Her mother was too busy.
Come down, then, Juliet, and let me know as
soon as she is at leisure. Juliet smiled, bowed
her head assentingly, and was seen no more that
day. The next, a similar effort was baffled by a
like evasion. On the third, Mrs. Aikin went
herself
to the door, knocked, and, after some bustle,
Juliet opened a crack, just enough to show her
face, which was died with blushes, as she said,
Mother says she don't wish at any time to see
strangers.
Then let the door remain ajar, Juliet, while I
speak to her. She concisely communicated her
plan, and requested that Juliet might regularly
attend
with the class. When she had finished,
Oh, pleaseplease, ma'am, said Juliet, wait
one minute!
Again the door was shut, and there were earnest
whisperings within; the latch was then lifted, and
Juliet most joyfully criedI may come, I may
come!
There
is
one thing more delightful than to make
a child happythe expectation that the happiness
will lead to permanent good.
CHAPTER XII.
SOCIETY AT THE POOR MAN'S HOUSE.
Be ye given to hospitality.
All
the preliminaries were arranged, and the
time arrived for the first
sociable,
as the parties had
agreed to call their meeting. They all belonged,
according to the common classification, to the
lower orders
shame to us that we do not abjure
terms inappropriate to our country. Our humble
friends, having no
help
, were obliged to make
considerable
efforts to effect their meetings; but when
persons set about in earnest to obtain a
moderate
good, they will find, or make a way, to
compass
the means. Aunt Lottie was always at home
to see to the youngest childrenthere was a
caretaking
old grandmother in one familyanother
had a kind Cousin Sally ready to lend a hand
and one good mother would manage any way
rather than lose such a privilege for her children.
So, at six o'clock, the prescribed time, the members
of the sociable, numbering thirty, parents and
children
included, assembled at the Aikins'. Their
room had the air of comfort that tidiness and
judicious
arrangement can give to the commonest
apartment. The bed (it must be remembered the
Aikins were yet obliged to make one room serve
for kitchen, bedroom, and parlour), the bed was
made up as nicely as a shaking Quaker's, and
covered
by a patchwork quiltthe work and pride of
the little Aikins, and the admiration of the matrons.
A substantial rag carpet was spread over the
middle
of the floor. The stove, a mournful substitute
for the cheerful, open fireplace of the olden time,
was black and shining as stove could be. Uncle
Phil's cushioned chair, and Aunt Lottie's stuffed
one, stood on either side of the stove. The
window-ledges
were filled with the prettiest screens
plants, Aunt Lottie's chargethe stoutest in pots,
and the nurslings in well-patched teapots and mugs.
A Connecticut clock (bless the economical artists
that have placed within the reach of every poor man
this domestic friend and faithful monitor) stood on
the mantel-piece. A curtain was drawn aside from
two book-shelves, filled with excellent books; the
most conspicuous were a Bible, a Hymn-book, the
Pilgrim's Progress, a Compend of Universal
History
,
History of America, the American Revolution, a
Life of Washington, and a Constitution of the
United
States, bound up with Washington's Farewell
Address. Underneath these shelves was a pine
table, with a pile of books, slates, and
writing-books
,
two clearly-burning lamps on it, and a
chair for Mr. Barlow and benches for the children
beside it. A smaller table was placed in the
middle
of the room; and on it, bright as burnished
gold, two brass candlesticks, which Susan had
inherited
from her grandmother, and which proudly
bore two good mould candles of her thrifty
grandchild's
running. On another table, under the glass,
was a waiter, with a nice napkin, which covered a
simple treat of biscuits and butter, cakes, nuts, and
apples; and on the stove a pot of cocoa.
We none of us, Harry Aikin had said, when
arranging the sociables with his friends, spend a
penny at the dram-shop, so we may well afford
a little family cheer at home, where wives and
children
can partake with us; and thus the good things
God gives us may be used to nourish our affections.
May not this be esteemed a mode of obedience to
the Christian laweating and drinking to the glory
of God?
Our details may be tiresome; but do they not
show that, in this country, real comforts, and even
the best pleasures of lifehospitality, liberality,
and charitycan be attained by the poor,
if
intelligent
and managing?
that they are not compelled,
even the less-favoured portions of them, to exhaust
life in painful efforts to keep soul and body
together
?
but that, by exertion and contrivance, they
may cultivate their own and their children's minds
and hearts, and advance them in that upward
course open to all. Let others glory in the
countries of luxuries and the arts; let us thank
God that ours is filled with blessings for the poor
man.
Mr. Barlow selected the horse and the cow, as
the most useful animals to man, for the subjects of
his first lecture. He was a sincerely and
earnestly
religious man; and he believed ignorance to be
the most fruitful source of irreligion, and that, the
more the mind was awakened to the wonders of
creation, the more it understood of the wisdom and
benevolence of the contrivances of the Creator,
the more certainly would it reject the bad seed of
infidelity that is sowed at broadcast with such
cruel industry.
The children, at first, thought they knew every
thing to be known about horses and cows; some
of their parents thought so too, and looked up to
the clock, secretly hoping the lecture would not
last long; but while Mr. Barlow described, in the
simplest possible terms, the structure of these
animals
the
provisions for their own enjoyment, and
their adaptation to the wants of man,while he
told particulars of their history and habits in
different
countries, and related some authentic
anecdotes
of themthe clock struck seven, and the
pointer was approaching to eight when he finished.
He was saluted with the most unequivocal of all
compliments to speakers, of, Oh, how short!
and, Please, Mr. Barlow, go on. He thanked
the audience for their attention; said he would
put off
going on
till the next meeting, when he
expected
the children would show him their books,
with the best drawings they could make of a horse
and a cow, and as much of his lecture as they
could remember, neatly written down. The
children
then formed into little knots, some playing at
jack-straws and some at checkers. The
treat
was
served, and Sam M'Elroy (now a sturdy boy,
apprenticed
to a farmer on Long Island) proposed to
his companions that they should pick out nuts for
the girls. While this boyish gallantry was being
executed, Do you really believe, William Aikin,
said John Miner, all Mr. Barlow said about
horses? I know very well they are so made as
to be strong, and fleet, and spry; but do you really
believe a horse has thoughts and feelings? I think
it's just of a piece with a fairy story.
That's because, John, you are not acquainted
with horses. I am sure father's horse knows more
than some men, and feels more, too. When I go
into the stable, he turns his head and gives me a
look that all but says, `How d'ye do, Will?' and
he will lay his head against me just as our baby
does; that must be feeling, John: he don't do so
to a stranger. He knows, as well as I do, the
places he is in the habit of stopping at; and if you
could see how impatient he is to get home to his
stable at night, you would own he had hope or
expectation, and there must be thought for that
thought of the rest and food that's coming. I don't
know the truth of what Mr. Barlow says about the
superior intelligence of horses in Asia, where they
are treated like companions and friends; but I
believe
it, for, as far as I have seen, whatever thinks
and feels is the better for being well treated.
That's true, I believe, William, said Sam
M'Elroy; Mr. Birt has a little heifer among his
cows that is the crossest, snarlingest thing you
ever saw: not one of the boys or men either can
milk her, but she'll stand as patient as a lamb to
Nannie Smith. I told you about Nannie: she is
the girl that is so kind to everybody; and she
always
speaks softly to the heifer, and pats her, and
strokes her, and the men kick her and beat her.
Well, then, Sam, resumed John Miner, I
suppose you think cows have feelings?
Cows have feelings!to be sure I do. You
should see a cow meet her calf after they have
been apart a day; and you should hear her
moanings
when the calf is taken away from her.
Ah, added the poor boy, sighing, as some
painful
recollections pressed on him, cows have a
great deal more feeling than some mothers.
K
Well, said John Miner, after a little
reflection
,
I don't know but Mr. Barlow and you are
right, boys. Any how, I hope I never shall abuse
an animal as I have seen some people. I think
don't you, William?people would be a great deal
better if they knew about things.
Yes, I do, John; and I was thinking almost
the very same thing when Mr. Barlow was
explaining
to us some parts of the anatomy of the
horse and cow. I thought, when God had seemed
to take such pains to contrive them, so that they
might enjoy their lives, it was a horrid shame for
men to beat, and kick, and maim God's wonderful
work.
And did not you think, asked Sam, that
part of it was good where he spoke of men
beating
horses and swearing at the same time
calling
on God, as it were, to witness their abuse of
his creatures? I guess, if they only stopped to
think a minute, they would not do so.
There is great use, replied William, as Aunt
Lottie always says, in thinking beforehand, and
beginning right. Now, would it not be a good
plan for us to draw up a paper, and sign it,
resolving
always to be kind and thoughtful for
animals
?
The boys readily agreed to the
proposition
.
They retired to the writing-table. William
wrote the resolution. They all signed it, and left
it in his safe keeping; and many a dumb creature
has since profited by it.
Little Ruth Aikin had drawn her stool close to
Mr. Barlow, and was picking out nuts for him,
while Juliet was paring his apple.
That was a funny story you told, sir, said
Ruth, about a cow being mother to a baby, out
in the new country; did she really lie down for
the poor little thing to suckle her, and low when
she was creeping towards her?
Why, yes, Anne, answered Juliet, anticipating
Mr. Barlow's reply; and don't you remember how
she licked over the baby's head and face, just as
she would have done her calf's? I think such a
mother is the best if you lose your real one.
Why, Juliet, how funny!
You would not think I felt funny, whispered
Juliet to Ruth, with the confidence natural to
childhood
,
if you knew I had not eaten any thing
to-day
but a bunch of raisins, and they tasted
horribly
.
Raisins taste horriblythat can't be, replied
Ruth, who had not tasted them above twice in her
life.
They didand so does cake very often to me,
when we have not any thing else. Mother, as I
call her, sometimes sleeps all day, and she forgets
we have not any thing to eat.
Do eat some biscuits, Juliet.
I can'tI am not hungry; I hardly ever am
hungry now-a-days.
How strange, when you have raisins and cake,
and I don't get any thing but a bit of dry bread for
supper; but I'm so hungry it always tastes good.
Poor Juliet, while little Ruth was plump and
rosy on her dry bread, was suffering the
cruel-effects
of irregular and improper food.
Not one of the company enjoyed the sociable
more than Uncle Phil; to be sure, he took a long
sound nap during Mr. Barlow's lecture; but, when
that was over, he endorsed every word of it,
averring
that horses and cows were knowing
critters
and remarking with delightful complacencyIt's
a great privilege for the young folks to meet
together
with them that's seen life, and knows as much
as we do.
Why, yes, said Caleb Miner, whose rugged
features
expressed a general discontent, it's a kind
of a privilege, to be sure, and thanks to you, Aikin,
for thinking of it; a poor man, and a poor man's
children, have but few privileges in this life; work,
work, and no play; while the rich have nothing
to do but enjoy themselves.
Enjoy themselves if they can, and work too,
replied Henry Aikin, with a smile. I often drive
home at nightfall with a light heart, for my work
is done, my wages earned and paid; and I leave
the merchants who employ me standing over their
desks, their brows drawn up to a knot with care
and anxiety; and there they stay till seven, eight,
or nine o'clock, looking over puzzling accounts,
calculating gains or losses, as the case may be. If
there are such rich men as you speak of, Miner, they
are beyond my knowledge. I don't know that you
join in it; but, I must say, I think there is a useless
and senseless outcry against rich men. It comes
from the unobserving, ignorant, and unreflecting.
We must remember that, in our country, there are
no fixed classes; the poor family of this generation
is the rich family of the next; and, more than that,
the poor of to-day are the rich of to-morrow, and
the rich of to-day the poor of to-morrow. The
prizes are open to all, and they fall without favour.
Our rich people, too, are, many of them, among the
very best persons in society. I know some such
there is Mr. Beckwith, he has ten talents, and a
faithful steward is he; he and his whole family are
an honour and blessing to their countrydoing in
every way all the good they can. Such a rich man
as Morris Finley I despise, or rather pity, as much
as you or any man can; but, pray, do not let us
envy him his richesthey are something quite
independent
of himself; and, can a man be really
poorer than he isa poor mind, a poor heartthat
is the poverty to shun. As to rich men being at
their ease, Miner, every new acquisition brings a
new wanta new responsibility.
But, Aikin, Aikinnow, candidly, would you
not be willing to take their wants and
responsibilities
with their purses?
I cannot say, Miner; money is the
representative
of powerthe means-of extended usefulness;
and we all have dreams of the wonderful good we
should do if we had these means in our hands.
But this I do know, that, till we are conscious of
employing, and
employing well
, the means we have,
we ought not to crave more. But let us look at
the matter in the right point of view. We are all
children of one familyall are to live here a few
yearssome in one station, and some in another.
We are all of us, from the highest to the lowest,
labourers in our Father's field; and
as we sow, so
shall we reap
. If we labour rightly, those words
of truth and
immense
import will sound in our ears
like a promise, and not like a threat. We shall
work at our posts like faithful children, not like
tasked slaves; and shall be sure of the riches that
perish not in the using. As to all other riches, it
K 2
is not worth our while to covet or envy them;
except
in some rare cases, we have all, in this
country
,
gifts and means enough. As to property, I am
the poorest man of you all.
Yes, yes, Aikin; but you've every thing else
what is the little advantage we have in property,
compared to your education, and so forth?
This argument Aikin could not sincerely
gainsay
;
but, anxious to impart some of his sentiments
to his friends, he proceeded
Among us working-men, property is a sign of
industry, ingenuity, temperance, and frugality;
therefore, I am anxious to make what excuse I can
for being so much poorer than the rest of you.
You know I began with a broken-down
constitution
,
and have never been able to perform half the
labour of a sound man; but I have taken care of
what strength I hadI selected a healthy business
I have been strictly temperate, not only in
drinking
,
but in eatingand this, with always a clean,
cheerful home to come to, has made me a stouter
man at forty than I was at three-and-twenty. In
the meantime, I have seen many a lawyer
growing
rich, and, just when he has laid up much goods,
falling a prey to disease contracted sitting at an
office table, performing labour that some of us might
fancy no labour at all; but which is proved, by its
effects, to be much harder than our work.
Merchants
,
too, whom I remember, bright and blooming,
have gone on laying up their thousands and tens of
thousandsgoing from fagging in their
counting-houses
to feasting like kings; and, at forty-five or
fifty, look at themthey have houses, and lands,
and coaches, to be sure, but do they enjoy them?
There is John Marlow, of the house of Marlow,
Minter, & Co.why, he would give half his
fortune
to be able to eat those nuts you are eating,
Miner, and go to bed and sleep as you will after
them. Look at Morris Finleyhis face looks to
me like an account-book, written over with dollars
and cents, as if he had coined his soul into them.
And there is Robson, of the house of Robson & Co.
I remember his hair as black, glossy, and thick
as your John's, and his colour as pure red and
white; now, he has a scratch on the top of his
headhis eyes buried in unwholesome fathis
skin mottled, and he lives between his
counting-house
and Broadway, in continual dread of an
apoplexy
.
How many Pearl-street merchants over
five-and-thirty are dyspeptics?
But, mercy on us, Aikin! you don't suppose
money is infected with dyspepsy?
No; but I do suppose that those who make it
an end, and not a means, pay the penalty of their
folly. I do suppose that the labour and anxiety of
mind attending the accumulation and care of it,
and the animal indulgences it procures, are a very
common means of destroying the health. Now,
Miner, have we not a greater chance for health,
which we all allow to be the first of earthly
blessings
,
than the rich? Then, we have some
advantages
for the education of our children which
they cannot get. You may say, necessity is a
rough schoolmaster, but his lessons are best taught.
The rich cannot buy books, or hire masters, that
will teach their children as thoroughly as ours are
taught by circumstances, industry, ingenuity,
frugality
,
and self-denial. Besides, are not our little
flocks mutual assistance and mutual kindness
societies
?
They are, that's truethey are; and though
I must own mine ain't brought up like yours, and
they do have their little sprees and flashes, yet
they are open-handed to one another, and take
part with one another in their pleasures, and
troubles
,
and battles, and so on. But go on, Aikin; I
feel as if I were growing richer every sentence
you utter.
Before Aikin could proceed, a hand-bell rung
loudly and impatiently, the well-known signal for
poor little Juliet. The children gathered around
her to express their unwillingness to part with her,
and William Aikin, in his eagerness, stumbled
over Miner's foot, which was in rather an
obtrusive
position. Oh, Mr. Miner, I beg your
pardon
,
said the little fellow.
There, now, said Miner, that puts me in mind
of what I am often grumbling at; your children
are an exception; but how, in the name of nature,
are our children to learn manners in our rough and
tumble way of living? Can you figure that out?
Why, Miner, manners, for the most part, are
only the signs of qualities. If a child has a kind
and gentle disposition, he will have the
outward
sign; if he have the principle that
teaches
him to maintain his own rights, and not
encroach
on those of others, he will have dignity
and deference, which I take to be qualities of the
best manners. As to forms of expression, such as
my boy used when he stumbled over your foot,
they are easily taught: this I call women's work.
They are naturally more mannerly than we.
There are, to be sure, certain forms that are in use
by what are called the `polite world' that we can
know nothing of; but they are not essential to the
spirit of good manners. Ours, I believe, is the only
country where those who compose the lower
classes have the power and the means of good
manners; for here there is no sense of
degradation
from the necessity of labour. Here, if we
will, the poorest of us can get education enough
for our children to make them feel the dignity of
their nature and destiny, and to make them realize
the real equality of rights on which the institutions
of the country are based.
Self-respect is the real
basis of good manners
. It makes my blood boil to
see the manners of the low-born who come here
from the old countriestheir servility, their
meanness
,
their crouching to their superiors when they
expect a favour, and their impertinence, and
disobligingness
,
and downright insolence, when the
power is in their own hands. They are like horses
used to being guided and driven, and know no
more than they would how, without harness, reins,
and blinders, to do their duty.
[5]
[5]
While writing this page, a circumstance has come to my
knowledge that illustrates my theory of the effect of condition
upon manners. Our streets, since the last snow-storm, even
the side-walks, are almost impassable with masses of snow and
ice. M., a distinguished exile, and his wife, who earn an
honourable
living by imparting the accomplishments of their more
fortunate days, were returning from their lessons. The
hackney-coach
had disappointed them. M., deprived of one leg,
found it impossible to use his crutches on the ice. They stopped
at the corner of a street. The packed omnibuses passed them.
Private sleighs, from which, as they drew up to turn the corner,
they heard expressions of compassion, also, like the Levite,
passed on. Two
labouring men
offered their aid: one carried
M.'s crutches, the other all but carried him to his own door
when they both respectfully took their leave, declining the
compensation (a most liberal one) which M. offered, accustomed
to countries where the services of the poor have always their
money value.
You say, Harry, interposed Mrs. Aikin, that
it is women's work to teach manners to the
children
;
but, don't you think they learn them mostly
from example?
Certainly I do; manners, as well as every
thing else. Man is called an imitative animal.
You can tell by the actions of a child a year old
what sort of people it has lived with. If parents
are civil and kind to one another,if children
never hear from them profane or coarse language,
they will as naturally grow up well-behaved as that
candle took the form of the mould it was run in.
But, said Miner, who was willing to shift off
the consequences of some of his short-comings
upon
inevitable chances, suppose you do set a bright
example at home, you can't shut your children up
therethey've got to go out, and go to school, and
hear and see every thing under the sun.
Yes, Mr. Miner, replied Susan Aikin, but
it's surprising, if they are taken care of at home,
how little any thing out of doors seems to harm
them.
I tell you what, Miner, said Uncle Phil, glad
of an opportunity to cut in, what our folks call
taking care
is a pretty considerable
chore
,it's
doing a little here, and doing a little there, and
always
doing.
Wife! called out Miner to his helpmate, who
had just given her child a cuff for treading on her
toe,wife, I depend on your remembering all
this: you know I've a dreadful poor memory; and
I want you to tell it over to the children.
Poor Miner, in spite of all Henry-Aikin's hints,
continued in the common error of expecting to
effect that by precept which is the work of
example
,
patiently repeated, day after day, and year
after year.
The conversation then took a more
miscellaneous
turn. The women talked over their domestic
affairs, and the men ran upon politics, showing
themselves sufficiently enlightened, and as
disinterested
as we wish all politicians were. At half
past nine they separated, cheerful, and, we trust,
profited; and, as they heard the carriages
rumbling
along the streets that were then conveying
the earliest of our fashionables to their crowded
parties, we think our humble friends had no reason
to contrast their social pleasures unfavourably with
those of the rich, but that they might feel that
their meeting together, as Uncle Phil said in this
neighbourly way, was a privilege.'
CHAPTER XIII
SOCIETY AT THE RICH MAN'S HOME.
The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them.
We
change the scene to a fine new house, in a
fashionable quarter of the city: Mrs Finley alights
from her own carriage, and meets her daughter at
the door, her face full of something she had to
communicate. Oh, mamma, she exclaimed,
who was that that came into Morrison's thread
and needle store just as you passed?a lady with
an ermine boa,you bowed to her.
Mrs. Kingson. Why, Sabina Jane?
The lady that was with her asked her, when
they got into the shop, who she bowed to? She
said, `
That
Mrs. Finley that left her card at my
house!'`Does she keep a carriage?' asked the
other lady; and then she took up her eye-glass
and looked after you, and said, so everybody might
have heard her in the shop, `Liveries! and a coat
of arms!no wonder we are a laughing-stock to
foreigners.'
Well, answered the perturbed and perplexed
mother, I do wonder what is the harm of liveries?
It is next to impossible to find a servant that is
willing to wear them; that's a proof they are
genteel
;
and then, as to the coat of arms, I am sure
the man that made the harness said it was the
latest pattern he had in his shop. That coach,
she continued, has been nothing but a plague to
me. Your father is always fretting about the
expense
,
and complaining that the coachman cheats
him; and John will do nothing but drive the
horses; and everybody that has a coachman in
livery has a footman, and your father thinks the
waiter can turn into a footman when I want one,
but he don't know how inconvenient that is.
Nobody
knows, but
them
that has them, the trials of
keeping a carriage.
[6]
[6]
One of these incidental trials was met by a ready
ingenuity
that deserves a more enduring preservation than we can
give it. A gentleman told his coachman to bring him a pitcher
of fresh water from the pump. I can't, sir.Why not?
'Tis not my business.What the deuse is your business?
Taking care of the carriage, sir.Bring up the carriage,
then. The carriage came: John (to the waiter), get into
the carriage, and bring me a pitcher of fresh water from the
pump.
Then, mamma, why do you keep one?
Don't ask such silly questions, Sabina Jane.
A servant entered. Mrs. Finley, here are the
notes that have come in since you went out. Mrs.
Finley took them eagerly. She had sent out
invitations
for a party, and she was anxious to know
who had accepted and who refused. The first she
opened was from the teacher of her only son
Arthur
William, informing her that Master Arthur was
behind-hand in all his studies, and that, unless his
lessons were superintended at home, he feared he
must dismiss the boy, as the reputation of his
school depended on the progress of his scholars.
This is too bad, said Mrs. Finley; I
wonder
what we pay him for but to teach? Mr.
Beltam
always said Arthur was a prodigy when he
went to his school.
But, mamma, you said Arthur could not read
when he had been to Mr. Beltam's two years.
What's that to the purpose, miss? Mr.
Beltam
never sent in any complaints. I will not
make myself a slave to looking after your lessons
at home; I have not health for it: besides, your
father and I never studied Latin, and French, and
philosophy, and them things.
I wonder what you did study, mother?
For shame, Sabina Jane! I am sure your
father understands every kind of arithmetic.
Does he, mother? I did not know he
understood
any thing.
L
It was difficult to decide whether this was said
with simplicity or impertinence. Unfortunate,
indeed
,
are those children who, with their
acquisitions
,
acquire a contempt for their parents'
ignorance
.
The next note opened was a polite notice
to Mrs. Finley, from Mademoiselle A, that a
box of newly-arrived Parisian millinery would be
opened for her patrons' inspection the next
morning
.
Very attentive in Mademoiselle! said
Mrs. Finley, when unfortunately the pleasure of
being a patron was checked by one of the usual
penalties for such distinctions. A bill had dropped
from within the note, which the little girl handed
to her mother, reading the amount, $57 45. How
very provoking! exclaimed Mrs. Finley; she
might better have sent it at any other time: your
father frets so about the expenses for the party.
I am sure they are necessary; but I can't ask him
for the money to pay Mademoiselle now, that's
certain; so, throw the bill in the fire, Sabina Jane;
and, when Mademoiselle sends for the money, I
can say I haven't got the bill.
Yes, mamma, and you can say it must have
dropped out; it did drop, you know.
That's well thought of, Sabina Jane, and no
lie either. Thus did this poor child receive from
her weak mother a lesson in fraud, lying, and
hypocrisy
.
Mrs. Finley proceeded in the
examination
of her notes. `Mrs. Dilhurst accepts,' &c.
Oh, I knew she would accept; I wonder when
she ever refused? `Mrs. Kingson regrets an
engagement
,'
&c. What a shame it is for people
to lie so! She cannot have an engagement a
fortnight
ahead! We have not space to give the
various returns Mrs. Finley then read and
received
in the course of the day. She had made
a great effort to assemble a party of fashionable
people: she had, to use the current word,
cut
those of her acquaintance that might be suspected
of vulgarity; and she had left her cards at the
houses of those who had been all their lives, and
their parents before them, in the best society.
She was sure Mrs. Kingson, at whose request she
had repeatedly subscribed to societies, would
accept
;
and, if Mrs. Kingson accepted, the Misses
would, and then the Baron de  would,
and then the success of her party was secured.
Presuming upon all this, no expense had been
spared: the Kendall band had been engaged; and
the party was to be as brilliant as music, lights,
china, glass, and the luxuries of the season could
make it. Finley, whose vanity was his next
strongest passion to his cupidity, had been lavish
of his money. Every thing his wife asked for he
had granted, with one single reservation: he had
stood at bay at a pat-de foie gras,
[7]
[7]
As we hope to have readers who never heard of a
pat de
foie gras,
we inform them that it is an eatable not very rare at
evening parties. It is a pie imported from France, and
costing
,
if we are correctly informed, from twenty to fifty dollars.
An unnatural enlargement of the liver of geese is produced by
confining the bird, and subjecting it to artificial heat. We
hardly
know which most to admire,the mercy of the ingenious
gastronomist
who devised this luxury, or the taste of its consumers.
which his
wife maintained to be essential. What, thirty
dollars, he said, for what was nothing, after all,
but a pie of geese's livers!no, he could not go
that! and Mrs. Morris Finley, more prudent than
some wives, never urged when morally certain of
urging in vain.
Poor Mrs. Finley, with every luxury that money
could buy, felt deeply mortified at the absence of
that which money could not buy. There is a
certain
aristocracy in our city that is most carefully
guarded. It is said that the barriers here may be
as easily passed as the fences that enclose our
fields, so mildly contrasting with the thorny hedges
of the aristocracy of the parent land. But it is
not so. All that we would ask is, that the terms
of admission might be settled on
the right ground
.
However, we leave this to be arranged by the
parties
concerned, and proceed to the facts in the
case of Mrs. Morris Finley. Her husband cared
nothing about the matter; but that it should appear
Morris Finley was among the first
good society
(so called), he looked upon as a part of his
money's
wortha fair return for his expenditure, and
therefore he had his full part in his wife's
mortification
,
when, after all her pushing, her arts and
trucklings, her shirking this old acquaintance and
cutting that relation, their empty places were not
filled by bright names in the fashionable world.
Two or three stars wandered from their sphere
into Mrs. Finley's orbit; some from motives
arising
from a business-relation with Finley, and
others from good-nature peculiar to the
individuals
.
But these few lights only served to show the
general darkness. Such vain ambition as the
Finleys'
might be cured, if comments like the
following
were overheard.
Mrs. Kingson, do you mean to accept Mrs.
Finley's invitation?
No, my dear.
Why, aunt? they say it is to be something
quite superb.
So much the worse. Did she not let her poor
mother toil away her life in a second-rate
boarding-house
?
and she will not employ her worthy
cousins who sew for me, because they are her
cousins. No, I'll have nothing to do with such
people as the Finleys.
Mamma, do you mean to go to the Finleys'?
No, indeed; it was too impertinent of the
woman to ask me. I never saw her except at
Saratoga.
Mrs. Smith, are you going to the Finleys'?
No; they are too ignorant and vulgar.
But you visit the Fitzroys?
My dear, you forget; Fitzroy is a junior
partner
of Mr. Smith.
Oh, is he?
Mrs. Brown, do you go to the Finleys'?
No, I will not, when I can help it, visit the
merely
rich.
These reasons, and a hundred similar, were of
course not alleged to Mrs. Finley, but veiled in
the conventional regrets, previous
engagements
,
&c. &c. So Mrs. Morris Finley gave
her party to those for whom she did not think it
worth the trouble; nor did her husband deem it
worth the expense. The house was turned
topsy-turvy
,
the servants overworked, the children made
ill by surfeiting, and no one happy or grateful;
the invited regarded Mrs. Finley with contempt,
and the
left out
with resentment.
Which, we would ask, was the
richest
man,
estimated
by the hospitality exercised and enjoyed,
Henry Aikin, or Morris Finley?
L 2
CHAPTER XIV.
AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE NOT FORGOT.
Few
things are more gratifying to a benevolent
person than to know that a charity has proved
effective
;
and to the Aikins, to whom charities were
luxuries which their straitened circumstances
forbade
them often to indulge in, it was a happiness
hardly to be estimated by those who have it in
their power to give away every day. Little Juliet
had appeared from the first a gentle-tempered,
loving
,
and interesting child; but nothing could be
more desultory than her habits, nor more
discouraging
than her condition. She had, as she said,
been taught to read by her
real
mother; but, in her
present protectress's various removings, her books
had been lost, and her little learning forgotten, so
that she could not form a letter, and she even read
stumblingly.
She was, at first, a constant hinderance to the
little Aikins, and a constant trial of their mother's
inexhaustible patience. Her ear was caught by
every passing sound in the street, and her eye by
every occurrence in the apartment. But she was
most grateful for the kindness extended to her, and
most desirous to profit by it. Habits in children
are, like young plants, of rapid growth, and in a
few weeks Juliet's character underwent a
transformation
similar to that of her dress, where
substantial
,
neat, warm, and lasting garments had been
substituted for dirty finery.
Mrs. Aikin was not one of those selfish parents
who make it a sort of duty to cast aside
whatever
can possibly interfere with the advancement
of their own offspring. She was willing to take
something from their abundant portion to give to
this little orphan in the human family. She
sometimes
feared Juliet might exhaust Mr. Barlow's
patience; but he seemed rather to pity her
ignorance
and carelessness than to be irritated by
them. He was drawn to her by some
resemblance
in their fate. Both seemed dropped links
from the chain of humanity; both to have been
the objects of the intervention of Providence, and
both to have been cast upon the same charity.
In speaking of Juliet to Mrs. Aikin, Mr. Barlow
adverted to the reasons for the interest he felt in
the child; and yet, he said, this is not all; her
look, when she suddenly turns her eye, or that
imploring
expression when she fears she has
displeased
me, put me so in mind of one that's gone:
her voice, too, when she speaks low, Mistress
Aikin, it makes my heart throb, and the
perspiration
stand in the hollow of my hand.
You have not gained your strength yet,
replied
Mrs. Aikin, and a little matter affects you.
It is not a little matter, my good friend; I have
thought there was a possibilitybut that is foolish,
and I will not talk about it. It will cost me much
to part from her, as well as the rest of you; but
now there is no reason I should encumber you any
longer, for the old rule does not always hold good
`where there's room in the heart there's room in
the house.'
We have omitted to mention, that Aikin had
obtained
the place of assistant teacher in a classical
school for Mr. Barlow.
I know, sir, replied Susan, that you can
now get much more comfort elsewhere than we
can give you; but a grief and loss it will be to us
to part with you. I have been looking forward to
your taking the little back room, for Juliet told me
to-dayand, poor child, she was crying when she
said itthat her mother was about to move.
Juliet going too? exclaimed the children,
that is too bad.
A bustling step in the entry was heard, and
immediately
after an imperative voice at Mrs. Smith's
door, calling outOpen the doorI say I must
speak with you. The door opened, and Juliet's
voice was heard in reply, but so low that not
a word could be distinguished. The response
was sufficiently audibleDon't cry, childI'm
not going to hurt you, but I must speak with your
mother. The house is not mine, continued the
stranger, now evidently addressing Mrs. Smith;
and I have no authority to grant indulgences.
You are behind-hand for the last three weeks, and
if you don't pay Saturday, you must clear out
good day, ma'am.
An opportunity was now offered, as the landlord's
agent repassed the door, to speak for the room for
Mr. Barlow; but he and all the rest were
absorbed
in their interest for little Juliet, whose soft
footsteps
were soon heard on the stairs. Anne sprang
to the door, and opening it, asked Juliet to come in.
She will not, said Anne, as Juliet went out at
the street door; she blushed as red as fire, and
seemed to have something under her cloakwhat
can it mean?
Mrs. Aikin guessed what it meant; for, more
than once, she had observed Juliet going out on
secret expeditions; and once, when she had
looked
her full in the face, the poor child's downcast
eye and burning cheek betrayed her secret to Mrs.
Aikin. Truth is stamped with innocence on the
soul; there they blend, or are effaced together.
Now, Mrs. Aikin thought, she must no longer
scruple to interfere; and, when Juliet returned, she
went into the entry, and closing the door after her,
said
What have you there, Juliet?
She told me not to tell, ma'am.
You need not, my child, I know what it is.
The fumes of the gin had already betrayed the
secret
.
Does she take this stuff every day, Juliet?
No, Mrs. Aikin, not
now
, since she has such a
fever and coughshe only takes it when she feels
awfully. My
own
mother never took it, though she
had dreadful feelings, too.
While Juliet spoke, she seemed in a flutter of
impatience and timidityall eye and earas if
expecting a summons; or, what was still worse,
fearing a suspicion of betraying the miserable
woman's secret. In the meantime, Susan Aikin
was considering what she had best do. That Mrs.
Smith's disease must be aggravated, and her death
hastened, by the means she took for present relief,
was certain; and Susan was not of a temper to
fold her hands and sayIt is no business of mine
when she could help a fellow-creature, it was
her business.
Leave the mug here, Juliet, she said, and
tell your mother I wish to speak with her.
Oh, I dare not, Mrs. Aikinshe'll be so angry
with me; she does not mind speaking with other
people, but she seems to hate to see any of your
family. I'm sure I don't know what the reason is
thereI hear herpray let me go! and Juliet
seized the mug, which Mrs. Aikin had set on the
stair, and disappeared.
In a few moments Mrs. Aikin followed her and
tapped at the door; Juliet opened it, and stood
aghast, while Mrs. Aikin saidMrs. Smith, I
know you are sick, and in troublelet me come
in, and see if something cannot be done for you.
The door, evidently at a sign from within, was
closed in Mrs. Aikin's face; but, through the
crevices
,
Mrs. Aikin heard a voice that seemed familiar
to her, half scolding and half crying.
She again tapped at the door, and Juliet opened
it a crack, and said, in a voice whose tremulous
softness
contrasted with the rudeness of her words
She says, ma'am, she won't be bothered.
Well, Juliet, I'll go away now. She may feel
differently by-and-by.
Mrs. Aikin's persevering kindness and
forbearance
touched the heart of the miserable woman;
but the fumes of the liquor were mounting to her
brain, and she drew the bed-clothes over her head
and fell into a heavy sleep, from which she was
awakened late in the evening by the stealthy
entrance
of a man, who brought her a note from her
nominal husband. This threw her into violent
hysterics, during which the man disappeared; and
Juliet, who, wearied and hungry, had fallen asleep
across the foot of the bed, awakened. She was
terrified by Mrs. Smith's apparent unconsciousness
and convulsive sobs, and she, obeying her first
impulse, ran down to the Aikins. Harry and his
wife, without any false scruples, went to Mrs.
Smith's apartment, bidding Juliet to remain with
Aunt Lottie. They found Mrs. Smith in hysterics,
partly the effect of the gin, and partly of a sudden
distress which had been communicated to her by
the open letter she held in her clinched hand. A
filthy lace cap stuck on the side of her head; her
hair hung over her face; a tattered French cape
and a soiled silk gown served to make more
disgusting
,
but not to hide, the rags and dirt beneath
them.
Our friends had scarcely seen the woman when
they exchanged significant glances, for they both
recognised in the wretched person before them,
in spite of the dropsical cheeks, bloodshot eyes, and
sharpened features, the playmate of their
childhood
the
beauty of their youthful days, Paulina
Clark! Grieved and shocked were they: but they
thought only of administering aid; and this being
most judiciously done, Paulina soon after opened
her eyes, and, recognising her old acquaintances,
a new burst of emotion and a violent shrieking
ensued.
No disease is so completely under the control
of moral treatment as hysterics.
[8]
[8]
Much is said about the march of mind, and one of the
lesser
proofs of it may be admitted in the diminution of this
disease
of hysteria, the prevalence and
awful supremacy
of which
will be remembered by all who can look back for twenty or
thirty years.
Harry Aikin's
energetic voice, and his wife's gentle, calm
manner
,
soon subdued the spasm and restored their
patient
to a degree of rationality.
Oh! I know you, Susan; and you, too, Harry
Aikin! she said.
And we know you, Paulina, replied Susan;
and would be glad to do any thing we can for
you.
The kindness of Susan's tone brought a flood of
tears from Paulina. This seemed to relieve her,
and she said, in her natural voice
But you don't know, you don't know her
utterance
was choked.
We don't
know
, said Susan, but we can
guess.
And can you speak so kindly to me?
There is no reason we should not be kind to
you; kindness is what you want, and we have to
give, so it may be a comfort to us both.
Oh! indeed, I do want it, said Paulina,
recurring
to her present and pressing troubles. See
here, Harry Aikin, she added, picking up the note
she had dropped; do you advise me what to do;
this comes from my hus She hesitated: she
felt this was no time for deception, and she added,
from him I called my husband.
Aikin read the note, which was as follows:
I am blown, and must make a voyage up the
river to
Lockport
save yourselfthe police dogs
are on the scent
look to the black trunk
.
You must tell me the truth, Paulina, or I can
be of no service to you. How long have you lived
with this man?
Six months.
How long have you known him?
The same time, Harry Aikin, she replied,
without raising her eyes; for, with the companions
of her innocent days, came the feeling of shame.
Do you know what he is taken up for?
I don't; but I guess for passing counterfeit
bills.
Have you been concerned with him? Answer
truly, Paulina.
Wellhe has given me money to spend, and
told me to ask no questions, and he would tell me
no lies. I never knew a true note from a false
one.
Did you not believe you were passing counter
feit money?
I did not
know
that I was, and that is the most
I can say, Harry Aikin; but, as true as I live, I
have pawned my ear-rings and my finger-rings
rather than offer this money, and I did not use it
till I had nothing more the pawnbrokers would
take; that
is
the truth, Harry. I have not long
to live, I am sure I have not. Take pity on me,
Harry Aikin, and save me from finishing my
wretched life in the state prison! Susan! Susan!
beg him! Oh! think of old times in Essex!
Be sure, be sure, Paulina, Harry will do all
he can for you.
Yes, that I will; no time must be lost: stay
with her, Susan, till I return.
You ain't going to inform against me? said
the miserable woman, springing after him; but,
before he could reply, she shrunk back,
self-condemned
,
and burst into tears.
It's so long, she said, since I have had any
M
thing to do with anybody I could believe in! I am
a poor creature, Susan! I can remember the time
when I felt above you; and now it seems too much
for you to speak to such as me!
It seemed a great relief to her to confess her
faults; to retrace the past, and, looking through
the dark way she had trodden, to catch now and
then a glimpse of her early days. With a
sprinkling
of kind words from Susan, she went on as
follows:
Oh, Susan Aikin, you that have an honest
husband, and good children, and are
content to be
poor
, you don't know the feelings of the fallen.
Don't you think it's some excuse for me that I had
such a poor bringing up? The first I can
remember
was my mother talking about my pretty eyes,
and so on, and curling my hair; and the main
thing was to get me handsome outside-things;
how I used to despise your clothes and Lottie's;
it was all, all of a piece. Mother said she could
not afford to send me to the subscription-school;
but, when that dancing-school was set up in Essex,
I was sent to that. Do you remember I begged
Uncle Phil to let you go, but he would not hear to
it: he said `you danced about your work, and you
danced to school, and that was the dancing for
poor folks.'
Father was right, said Susan, with a smile at
the characteristic reply she had forgotten.
Yes, he was indeed right. Uncle Phil was
always reckoned simple-minded; but I have known
all sorts of people, and I can tell you, Susan, that
those who set their minds to do the right thing, be
they ever so simple, go straight aheadwhile
your bright folks slump on the right hand and on
the left. But where was Ioh, looking backa
dreary prospect! I grew up a poor, ignorant,
thoughtless, vain thingbut, Susan, I was not
hard-hearted; even then, had I got into good hands
had I married a solid man, and had children to
take care of, I should have been, not such a wife
and mother as you are, but I might have been a
decent womanand that was what I had secret
cravings to be, even when I had a carriage at my
command, and elegant rooms and furniture.
Poor Paulina!
Yes, Susan, most to be pitied then; for then
I was most blinded to all good; I can see it now,
even from these depths. You know mother
married
a rich old man, what we thought rich, and we
moved to New-York; I had always lots of young
men after me; I lived at the theatre, and the public
balls, and such places, and cared for nothing but
dress and flattery. Morris Finley courted meI
always liked himand if I had married him then
but there's no use in looking back; I wonder
if his conscience would be easy if he could see me
the poor ruined wretch I am now. Hark!what
noise is that?
It's only my children and Juliet, playing.
Poor Juliet!do you think Harry will get me
clear, Susan?
I hope so; but had you not better compose
yourself, and try to get a little sleep?
Sleep! I cannot. If you knew what a relief
it is to me to unburden my heartto have a good
person willing to sit down by me as you do. As I
was saying, when my stepfather died, and we had
nothing left, and Morris Finley felt he was going
ahead in the world, he left me. We went to
Essex
,
and then came back to New-York; mother set
up the milliner's businesstemptation was on every
side; and no wonder that such a poor weak
creature
as I fell. There was nothing to bind me to
virtue. My mother, poor soul, died; and her
death set me to thinking; and then, if a hand had
been stretched out to me in kindness, it would
have saved me; but the good set their faces against
the badthey do, SusanI mean common good
folks. You cannot tell what it is to have the eye
of your fellow-creature look on you with scorn, or
turned from you as if you were too vile to look
upon: I have felt this, and I went from bad to
worse.
Why did not you come to us, Paulina? We
would have done what we could for you.
I was afraid to, Susan; I did not suppose there
was anybody on earth good enough to pity me,
because I was wicked; and, for that, most needed
their pity.
Then, Paulina, you must have concluded
there were no true followers of Him who came to
seek and save those that were lost?
Maybe I have my own evil courses, in part, to
thank for such thoughts, Susan; but, then, is it not
strange that human creatures don't make more
allowance for one another? They say sick folks
feel for sick folks. Sin is the worst of sickness,
and are there any quite free from it?
You are right, Paulina; the strong should
uphold the weakthe well should look after the
sick.
That's what I mean, Susan, and I believe you
are so very good you practise it; but it is not
strange I dreaded to see your face; and all that
Juliet told me of you and your children, bringing
up to be a blessing and honour to the land, made
me more and more ashamed of myself. Thank
God, I never had a child. I do love Julietyou
see I am not fit to take care of herbut I did not
always tyrannise over hernot when
Not when you were yourself, Paulina.
Paulina
nodded assent: she had not courage in words
to confess her intemperance. Juliet was true to
you, continued Susan; she seems grateful for
your kindness to her.
Does shedoes Juliet feel grateful to me?
She does, Paulina; and that ought to be a
comfort to you.
It isit is; thank God, there is one creature
on earth the better for my having lived! My
life! Oh God, forgive me!poor Julietwhen I
am gone, Susan, you will see to her, won't you?
I will do the best I can.
Thank you, Susan; then I shall die easy as
to her. I have done but little, though I never
quite lost sight of my promise to her poor dying
mother.
Who was her mother, Paulina?
No one that you ever heard of. She called
her name Maria Brown. I never saw her till she
was near her death. The night before she died I
sat behind her, and held her up while she wrote a
few lines, and, taking a miniature from her neck,
sealed them up together. She was so weak she
fainted then, and when she came to she said she
M 2
would direct the packet the next day, and tell me
what to do with it. I slept by her; but, dear me!
I had taken some hot gin-and-waterfor I was
troubled with a cold stomachand I slept sound
and late, and when I waked she was dead and
cold. Poor little Juliet! I never shall forget how
she lay with her arms round her mother's neck
till they sent a coffin from the almshouse; it
seemed as if the child were glued there.
Did you not open the packet, Paulina?
Yes; but no names were mentioned, Her
letter was to her father, but it was only signed
with initials.
Were they M. B.? eagerly asked Susan, as a
faint hope dawned upon her.
M. B.B.no, I am pretty sure it was not B.:
it might have been B. L.; I think it was L.
You have preserved the packet?
I did, carefully; but in our last move it was
stolen or lost!
CHAPTER XV.
THE RICH MAN'S CHARITIES.
Many a house is full where the mind is unfurnished and
the heart is empty; and no hovel of mere penury ought ever to
be so sad as that house.
Dewey
.
It
was near ten o'clock when Henry Aikin, in
pursuance of his benevolent designs for Paulina,
rung at Morris Finley's door, and told the servant,
in reply to his saying Mr. Finley was dressing for
a party, that he had pressing business, and must
speak with him. The servant left Aikin in the
entry, and, entering the drawing-room, pushed the
door to after him, but not so close as to prevent
Aikin hearing the following dialogue:
There's somebody, ma'am, in the entry, wants
to speak with Mr. Finley.
Why did not you tell him he was not at home?
Because he is, ma'am.
Pshaw, Tom, you know he is going out
immediately
,
and it's all the same thing. Do you know
who it is?
No, ma'am.
Is it a gentleman?
He speaks like one, ma'am.
You certainly know, Tomis he a
gentleman
,
or only a man?
He is dressed like a man, ma'am.
Tom, you must get over tormenting me this
way: I've told you a hundred times the
distinction
.
Tom smiled. He evidently had in his
mind something like the old distinction of the
poet, though he could not, or dared not, express it
Worth makes the manthe want of it, the fellow.
Well, well, added Mrs. Finley, show him
in, and tell Mr. Finley.
Aikin entered with that air of blended modesty
and independence that characterized him;
certainly
with no look of inferiority, for he felt none;
and, as Mrs. Finley's eye fell on his fine
countenance
,
hers relaxed, and she was in the dilemma,
for a moment, of not knowing whether to class
him with the
somebodys
or
nobodys;
but her glance
descended to the plain and coarse garments of our
friend in time to change a half-made courtesy to a
salutation befitting an inferior. Sit down, she
said, waving her hand to the nearest chair.
Aikin took the offered seat, and awaited, with
what patience he could, the forthcoming of the
master of the splendid mansion, observing what
was before him with a feeling, not of envy or
covetousness, but with deep joy and thankfulness
for the virtue and true happiness of his humble
home. Miss Sabina Jane Finley, now a young
lady of twelve years, after surveying Aikin from
top to toe, said to her mother, in a suppressed but
audible voice,
Gentleman!
Mrs. Finley seemed to have what she, no doubt,
thought a truly genteel unconsciousness of the
man's
presence. She was very richly dressed
for a ball; but, as is a common case with poor
human nature, she was transferring the fault of her
faded and time-stricken face to her milliner. I
declare, Sabina Jane, she said, surveying herself
in the mirror, I never will get another cap of
Thompsonthese flowers are blue as the heavens.
You selected them yourself, mamma.
To be sure I did; but how could I tell how
they would look in the evening?
Why don't you wear your new French cap,
mamma?
Don't be a fool, childhave not I worn that
twice already? Pull down that blonde over my
shoulderhow it whoops! This is the second
time Smetz has served me this way. This gown
sets like fury. I never go out but I have some
trial that spoils all my pleasure. Don't let me see
you prink so, miss, turning to her daughter, and
pulling from her head a dress cap, that she was
trying on and arranging with all the airs and
graces of a fine lady; I have told you a thousand
times, Sabina Jane, she continued, not to be
fond of dress!Well, Tom, what is wanted now?
That French gentleman, ma'am, what teached
Miss Sabina Jane, is to call early for his money;
and if you'd please to give it to me to-night
I can't attend to it to-nighttell him to call
again.
He has called again and again, ma'am; and
he says his wife is sickand he looks so
distressed-like
.
I have not the money by me to-night, Tom.
Shall I ask Mr. Finley for it, ma'am?
No, Tom.
The image of the unhappy foreigner haunted
Tom's imagination; and, after lingering for a
moment
with the door in his hand, he saidMaybe
ma'am don't remember Mr. Finley gave out the
money for Mr. Felix.
Mrs. Finley did remember well that she had
received
the money, and had spent it that very
afternoon
for a most tempting piece of French
embroidery
a
love of a pocket handkerchief, that
cost only thirty dollars!the price of poor
Monsieur
Felix's labour for two quarters, with an
indolent
and neglected child. Shut the door, Tom,
she said; I can't be bothered about this money
now; tell Mr. Felix to call after breakfast. Tom
despaired and withdrew. How impertinent Tom
is getting, added Mrs. Finley; but this is the
way of all the servants in this country.
The housemaid now entered, and announced
that Miss Rosa (a three-year old girl) had been
throwing up the custard, and pie, and raisins, and
so on, that she ate at dinner.
Dear me! poor thing! exclaimed the mother,
what a weak stomach she has! Does Nancy
want me to come up and see her?
Nancy is out, ma'am.
Out
yet?
I don't know how she could think
of going out at all, when she told me at tea-time
that Rosa was feverish. I thought there was
one
faithful servant in the world, but now I give up.
Mrs. Finley went to look after her child, while
Aikin
was making his own mental comments on the
reasonableness of a parent, who expected more
fidelity from a hireling for paltry wages, than she
practised herself, with all the stimulants of the
responsibilities and happiness of a mother.
Fortunately
,
for he had become very impatient, he was
not left long to ponder on this inconsistency.
Finley
came in, dressed and perfumed for the party.
Ah, Harry Aikin, he said, after a momentary
surprise, is it youhow are you?
Well, thank you, Morris.
What impudence, thought Miss Sabina Jane,
for that man to call my papa Morris!
I have some
private
business with you, added
Aikin, glancing at the young lady.
Sabina Jane, said Finley, tell your mamma
the carriage is waitingthese fellows charge so
abominably for waiting. This last remark was
evidently a hint to Aikin to be brief.
But Aikin wanted no such spur. He
communicated
concisely Paulina's condition and wants;
and, knowing that Finley's conscience was of the
sluggish order, he tried to rouse it by recalling
vividly to his remembrance the pastthe days of
Paulina's innocence and beauty, and Finley's
devotion
to her. But Finley slurred it over like a
long-forgotten dream, that would not afford the
slightest basis for a claim upon his charity.
She is in a shocking condition, to be sure,
Aikin, he said; but, then, I make it an
invariable
rule never to give but to those that I know to
be worthy.
There is much to be done for our
fellow-creatures
,
Finley, besides giving gifts to the worthy.
Oh, I know that; and I subscribe liberally to
several of our institutions.
But will you do nothing towards encouraging
this poor, homeless, friendless creature to
repentance
and reformation?
Pshaw! Aikin, they never reform.
If that is true, a part of the sin must lie at our
doors, who afford them no helps. But there is no
time to discuss this: Paulina, I fear, will not be
able to prove her sincerity. She has, it seems to
me, but little while to live; if I can save her from
the police, I shall try hard to keep her where she
is, that her little remnant of life may be spent with
her old friends, who will care for her body and
soul.
Oh, well, if you really think she is going to
make a die of it, I am willing to give you
something
for her.
Finley took out his pocketbook, and after, as
Aikin could not but suspect, looking for a smaller
sum, he gave him a five-dollar note, with the air
of one who is conferring an astounding obligation.
Aikin expressed neither surprise nor gratitude;
but, quietly putting up the note, he said, You
know, Finley, money is not the most important
thing I had to ask. I want you to go to the
police-office
with me. You are a great merchant,
and your name is well known in the city; I am
nobody, and it may be necessary for me to get my
statement endorsed. Come, it is not five minutes'
walk for you.
Why, bless you, man, don't you see I'm going
out! there's my wife coming down stairs now.
Let her go in the carriageyou can follow
her.
Oh! that's impossibleshe would not go alone
into a party for the world.
Can she not wait till your return?
No; it is not reasonable to ask itit's late
nowandand
Good night; I have wasted my time here,
said Aikin, cutting short Finley's excuses, and
leaving him trying to silence his conscience by
dwelling on the five dollars he had givenby
fretting
at the deused folly of going out when people
were tired and wanted to go to bedand by joining
in his wife's vituperation against Nancy and all
her tribe.
CHAPTER XVI.
ANOTHER RICH MERCHANT'S HOUSE.
I will
go straight to Mr. Beckwith's, thought
Aikin, as he left Finley's; it is late, to be sure,
but never too late nor too early with him to do a
kind act. Mr. Beckwith was one of a very rich
firm, who employed Aikin as their carman. He
rung at the door, and was admitted by Jacob, a
coloured
man, who had grown gray in Mr. Beckwith's
service.
Walk in, sir, said he, civilly, leading the way
to the drawing-room, where Mrs. Beckwith, with
her cloak on, was sitting beside her eldest
daughter
,
warming her feet, while her two eldest sons
sat at the table drawing. As Aikin entered, Mrs.
Beckwith saluted him civilly, as she would any
other stranger; and, while one of the young men
rose to set a chair for him, she made some
courteous
remarks upon the weather and walking; and
then, after Jacob had returned, and said Mr.
Beckwith
would be down directly, she resumed the
conversation with her daughter, which Aikin's
entrance
had interrupted.
Did you find Madame Felix very ill, mother?
asked the young lady.
Very ill, Susan, and wanting every thing: no
wood, no comforts of any sort. The poor man
has money due to him, but he says he cannot get it.
N
Why didn't he let us know their condition
sooner?
Ah, Susan, it's very hard for such a man to
beg.
But it should not be called begging, should it,
mother? If, as you and father say, we are all
children of one family, when one wants what
another
has to spare, I do not see why the one
should not ask or the other should think it such a
mighty favour to give.
You have the right feeling about it, my dear;
but the difficulty is to reconcile the charities of
life with the spirit of independence and
self-reliance
which is so necessary to industry and
exertion
:
but where is Louisa?
She is sitting with mammy: her head has been
much worse since you went out, and Louisa will
not leave her.
I am glad of it: many a night has mammy sat
by your bedsides, patiently watching over you.
But, Kate, added the mother, for the first time
espying a child of eight years watching the
progress
of her brothers' drawing, how happens it
you are up yet?
Oh, mother, we have had such a funny time,
planning houses!
Planning houses! what do you mean?
An explanation followed, by which it appeared
that Mr. Beckwith contemplated building a block
of houses, to rent to those who could afford to pay
only a low rent. The houses were to contain
every convenience and comfort compatible with a
reasonable per centage on the money invested.
Mr. Beckwith had set his children to drawing
plans for these houses, not so much to test their
skill in draughting as their knowledge of the wants
of the poor, and their zeal for their
accommodation
.
Kate amused herself with relating the
various
failures and successes of the boyshow one
had left out the chimneys and the other the
windows
to
all which Aikin listened with eager
interest, notwithstanding the pressing nature of
his business.
Not so much time had passed as has been
occupied
in relating this scene, when Mr. Beckwith
appeared
,
and, after speaking to Aikin, turned to his
wife, saying, My dear, this is my friend Aikin,
of whom you have often heard me speak. Mrs.
Beckwith's countenance lighted up with that
expression
so common when a person is first
introduced
to a stranger for whom favourable
impressions
are entertained. Aikin, modest man that he
was, was gratified with this involuntary tribute.
How many opportunities of strengthening the
bonds of human brotherhood by a friendly look, or
a kind word, are passed by and lost for ever!
Lo! is not a word better than a gift? but both are
with a gracious man. Aikin communicated his
business to Mr. Beckwith, and without any delay
they were on their way to the police-office, where
Aikin told as much of Paulina's story to Mr.
Justice H as he deemed necessary for the
purposes of justice; and the said justice being
more moved than was his wont by Aikin's appeal
in Paulina's behalf, and authorized by the
assurance
of so substantial a person as Beckwith, of
the great firm of B. B. and Co., in his reliance
on Aikin's testimony; and, moreover, having
already
appeased the demands of justice by the
detection and apprehension of the gang associated
with Smith, vouchsafed to assure Aikin that,
provided
the black trunk was forthcoming in the
morning
,
no proceedings should be instituted against
Paulina.
Good night, Mr. Beckwith, said Aikin, as he
parted from his friend at the corner of the street
I am obliged to you.
Oh, no, no, AikinI am the person obliged;
for I go to bed the happier for having done you
this service.
Aikin was a reflecting manand, as he walked
hurriedly home, eager to relieve Paulina of a part
of her miserable burden, he made many reflections
upon the different scenes he had witnessed that
eveningat his own homein Paulina's room
at Morris Finley'sand at Mr. Beckwith's; and
he was confirmed in his previous conclusion, that
riches consist not in the abundance of possessions,
nor poverty in their scantiness; that the mind is
the treasure-house; and, finally, that Paulina,
though poor indeed, was not much poorer than
Morris Finley and his wife.
CHAPTER XVII.
A CURE FOR THE HEARTACHE.
The
next day, after Aikin had finished his
morning devotionsthis good man never ventured
upon the business, temptations, and trials of the
day, without first committing himself and his
household to Him who heareth those that call
on himJuliet was observed to rise from her
knees and rest her head on the back of the chair,
so as to screen her face, while her bosom heaved
and her tears fell on the floor. The children,
quick to see and to sympathize, gathered round
her; one said, Do you feel sick, Juliet?
another
,
What is the matter, Juliet?and little
Ruth, who was fresh from a moral lesson she had
received from her Aunt Lottie, the amount of which
was, that sin, in all its modifications, was the thing
to be cried for in this world, Ruth asked, Have
you been naughty, Juliet? Still Juliet did not
reply
,
till Mrs. Aikin drew her towards her, and,
setting
her on her lap, saidTell me, Juliet, what
troubles you?
Oh, ma'am, she answered, I know, by Mr.
Aikin's prayer, that my mother, as I call her, is
going to die, and then I shall have to go away from
you alland I shall be all alone in the world.
The children cast an imploring glance at their
mother, which said, as plain as words could express
N 2
itPray tell her that our home shall be her
homeour friends her friends. The elder
children
knew it belonged to their parents, and not to
them, to give such an assurance; but the younger
ones thought only of the quickest way to solace
the poor child; and Ruth, putting her cheek to
Juliet's
,
whisperedMother will be your mother,
and, if you want an aunt, you shall have a part of
my Aunt Lottie.
Little Phil, the youngling of the flock and
grandfather's
pet, echoed Ruth's meaning, shouting
And if you want a danfather, you shall have a
piece of my danfather! How certain it is that
children will imbibe the qualities of the moral
atmosphere
in which they live. Parents,
remembering
this, should trust more to their examples, and
expect less from their precepts. Tears fell from
Mrs. Aikin's eyestears from the fountain of those
feelings that have less of earth in them than
heaven;My good little children, she said,
we will try not to disappoint youwipe away
your tears, Julietthink of another thing Mr.
Aikin
said in his prayer`God is the father of the
fatherless;' be sure, therefore, you cannot be alone
in the world.
Come here, Juliet, said Mr. Barlow; and
Juliet
turned to him with a brightened face, verifying
the wise man's saying, that, as the dew assuageth
the heat, so is a kind word.You and I,
Juliet
,
continued the good man, have been led into
the same fold, and, please God, we will not
separate
again. Will you live with me and be my
little
housekeeperor room-keeper? I have now,
he added, turning, as if in explanation, to Susan
Aikin, enough for us both; say, Juliet, will you
go and live with me?
Juliet hung her head; the children looked as if
they were afraid she would say yes.
Ah, added Mr. Barlow, in a tone of
disappointment
,
I thought you loved me, Juliet.
So I do, sir; butbut it's so pleasant living
here.
William Aikin, whose expressions were as
impulsive
as his feelings, clapped his hands, and the
children all manifested, some in one way, some in
another, their delight.
Juliet is right, said Mr. Barlow, in a low tone,
to Harry Aikin; it is so pleasant living here, that,
when I go away, I shall have that dismal feeling
Juliet so dreads, that feeling of being
alone
. Oh,
how many times have I wished the goodness and
happiness in your family could be known. It
would be a lesson to many a proud rich manto
many a discontented poor one.
That's just what I say, Mr. Barlow, said
Uncle
Phil, rubbing his hands; I tell you our folks
are samples, and the whole secret of it is, that
every
one does their bestthat is to say, lives up to
their light, and if anybody can do any better than
that, I should like to know how; but come, the
breakfast is cooling while we are sarmonizing, as
it were.
The breakfast was despatched; Aikin went to
his daily business; Aunt Lottie and Juliet to
nursing
Paulina; Uncle Phil to a stroll in the
sunshine
with little Phil; Mr. Barlow, it being
Saturday
and a holyday, sat down in a corner with a
book; and Mrs. Aikin was setting all
to rights
in that quiet, efficient way where every stroke
tells, and marks the expert housewife.
Did you learn any thing of poor little Juliet's
parentage from the woman above? asked Mr.
Barlow at the first convenient opportunity. Mrs.
Aikin related all she had learned; nothing could
well be more unsatisfactory. Even Susan Aikin,
whose bright, healthy moral vision always
perceived
the first streak of daylight, could see
nothing
comforting
in it. As she finished, Mr.
Barlow
heaved a sigh, and then said, You might have
thought my proposal to take Juliet very strange.
Oh, no, sir; I am sure it is quite natural to feel
as if you wanted to stretch a wing over the poor
child; butbut the thing is, a girl wants women
to look after her; and I have concluded, when
Paulina
is gone, to take Juliet into our family.
What, Mrs. Aikin, with all your children?
Yes, sir; when one is used to have the care
of a good many, an addition does not seem to make
any difference.
[9]
[9]
An argument similar to this we have often heard used by
one whose sheltering charities seem only to be limited by the
wants of those that come within her sphere.
We always have a little
something
to spareand Juliet, poor child, might be
fed from the crumbs that fall from the table.
But then there are other expenses besides
her food.
Yes, sir; I have considered that, and
determined
,
as long as my health is spared, to work one
hour extra every night; what I can thus earn will
certainly cover all Juliet's expenses to usso, I see
my way quite clear; it is a comfort, sir, not to lose
the opportunity.
And blessed are those who seek such comforts
dear Mrs. Aikin. But this poor womanwill she
be willing to leave Juliet with you?
She will be glad to. Her only desire now
seems to be, for the little time that remains, to do
right. Oh, Mr. Barlow, I believe there are many
people in wicked courses who would turn from
them if they only had some true friend. I wish
Paulina to stay here the little time she has to live,
so does my husband; but he will not run in debt,
not even to help the distressed, which is a great
temptation. It takes more than one would think
to keep such a family as ours in necessaries; and,
through the blessing of kind Providence upon our
exertions, we have always had those, and some
luxuries too.
What luxuries? asked Mr. Barlow, with a
smile.
A good warm fire all day
[10]
[10]
A little poor boy specified this to me as one of the exclusive
privileges of the rich.
and a fire for
Lottie's
room whenever she wants it; plenty of books
for the children, and a share in a library for
ourselves
and
the pleasure of going to bed every
Saturday
night without owing a shilling, and a little
something in the Saving's Bank against a wet day,
andand Susan hesitated, for really she could
not remember any thing else that did not come
within the large class of necessaries. Mr. Barlow
finished her list
And a shelter and food at your table for a
friendless
stranger. Mrs. Aikin, if I could help you to
put your kind wishes into operation for this poor
woman, it would be a real pleasure to me. I can
let the room I have taken in Crosby-street, and pay
the rent of hers, if you will permit me to be a
boarder in your family, and retain my place in your
father's room till this woman has no longer
occasion
for hers.
You are very kind, sir; but there is back rent
to be paid. However, we will talk it over when
my husband comes, and contrive the best we can.
The dialogue of our friends was interrupted by
the appearance of a gentleman who announced
himself as Mr. Beckwith, and Susan being
summoned
to Paulina's room, he was left with Mr.
Barlow. After a little playful talk with the
sweet-tempered
chubby children, Mr. Beckwith, feeling
his way with that delicacy that marks the man
who does not exclude the poor from the courtesies
used among equals in fortune, made some remarks
about Aikin, and the aspect of the family, that led
Mr. Barlow to tell a portion of his own story, and to
relate the Aikins' succouring charities to Juliet,
and their kindness to the poor outcast Paulina.
He spoke of their exemplary performance of their
domestic duties, and of the advancement of their
children in knowledge and virtue. A country
may well boast its equality, he said, in conclusion,
that has such families as this in it. I never
should have credited what goes on beneath this
humble roof if I had not witnessed it. Here are
the genuine fruits of Christianity, and such fruit
as could only come to perfection in a land where
the government and institutions are based on the
gospel principle of equal rights and equal
privileges
to all.
You are an Englishman, Mr. Barlow. Do
you think, setting aside the greater compensation
our working-men get than yours, they are happier?
That is setting aside a vast deal, sir. This
superior compensation represents the comforts of
life, the means of education. What could Aikin
have been in my country with his shattered health,
his children, and helpless father-in-law, and
invalid
sister? These
independent dependants
would
have been tenants of the almshouseAikin
himself
,
most probably, there, and his children
supported
by the parish. When I see, sir, that a man
so conditioned can bring up a family as he does, in
such a city as thishis boys to be intelligent and
independent citizens, and his daughters to be
respectable
,
well-informed wives and mothers,I
must think this, sir, the happiest country in the
world for the labouring man.
I believe you are right; but we do not make
the most of our privileges. There is no telling
what a nation, with our institutions, might become,
if the domestic virtues were better understood and
practised by the labouring classes,if their
foundation
were laid in religion, and children were
brought up from their cradles to be temperate and
true, and industrious and frugal,if every
opportunity
were seized for improving them in
knowledge
,
and in the
practice
of the soul-preserving
virtues. The rich here can make no
separating
lines which the poor cannot pass. It is the
poor who fence themselves in with ignorance, and
press themselves down with shiftlessness and
vice. If there were more such families as this,
the rich would feel less exultation in their wealth,
the poor that there was no degradation in their
poverty. The rich would get rid of their pride,
the poor of their jealousy; and we should
admit
,
not theoretically and in our prayers, but
practically
,
that we are children of one family, and
that the happiness and advancement of one is the
happiness and advancement of all. I am
fortunate
,
added Mr. Beckwith, in conclusion, to
have found you here, sir. Here is a trifling sum
for the poor woman up stairs; it will, I hope,
enable your friends to do what they wish for her
a far greater benefaction than any money I can
give. Mrs. Aikin entered just in time to make
her acknowledgments, and she made them as if
the kindness were done to herself. Mr. Beckwith
changed the subject. This house must be small
for your family, Mrs. Aikin?
Yes, sir, but we contrive to make it do.
What is your rent?
For the whole, sir, one hundred and
fifty-dollars
.
For the whole house, excepting that poor
woman's room?
I wish it were, sir, but there are two rooms in
the garret rented to different personsthe best at
six, the other four shillings a week: then there
is a good room on this floor that rents at
seventy-five
dollars a year; and the family in the cellar
pay a dollar a week. Paulina's room is twenty
shillings a week.
And pray, Mrs. Aikin, what accommodations
do you get for your hundred and fifty dollars?
There is this roomyou see what it is, sir
a pot of paint and a pail of whitewash, always
ready, keep it decent. My husband made this.
she said, opening a closet, where every thing was
stowed as neatly and compactly as honey in a
hive; we could not do with an open dresser in
a room where we ate and slept; and here,
opening
a door into a little dark room,here is a
comfortable place for the children. Comfortable
it was, though dark and small, by virtue of the
most exact order and cleanliness. Then, sir,
we have the whole of the second floor, which gives
us a large comfortable room for my sister, another
for father, and a little room for the children. We
make out very well, sir.
I know, Mrs. Aikin, there is a great virtue in
this
making out
, but you must suffer inconvenience
when you have sickness in the family?
Why, sir, she replied, with a smile, we
take care not to get sick often; but, when we have
needed a room for sickness, father has turned in
with the boys;father has such a contented
disposition
,
nothing puts him out. HarryI mean
my husband, sirsays such a disposition as
father's
is meat, drink, and lodging.
Pardon my making so many inquiries, Mrs.
Aikin; believe me, it is not from idle curiosity.
By what contrivance do you (turning his eye to
Mr. Barlow) get a spare room?
A spare room, sir, is a blessing I never expect
to have; but father has a sociable disposition, so
we call his the spare room, and put a friend there
when we have occasion.
Mr. Beckwith was reminded of a certain system
of philosophy which teaches that there is no
material
worldno actual houses, furniture, &c.,that
these things are only shadows of ideas. Ah,
O
thought he, my friends here are really richer
than many that live in four-story houses. Having
an important purpose in his inquiries, he went on.
Do you not, Mrs. Aikin, experience serious
inconvenience
from having so many families under
one roof?
We do, sir. I have often thought the time
must come when landlords would feel more for
poor people, and be more considerate who they
put together. It is so difficult to keep children
from bad company, poor thingsthey are not
particular
,
you know, sir. This is the only thing that
has ever really worried me about our situation: I
can contrive to get along with little troubles.
And what are the little troubles?
Why, sir, it is something of a trial not to have
a decent steps, entry, and stairs. We have no
place to store wood, so we cannot buy it in
summer
,
which would be a great saving to us. Then,
the cistern is leaky, and not half large enough to
furnish water to half the tenants; and, if we set
tubs under the front spout, there is always some
one to dispute our right; so we have given up
rain-water, and make pump-water do: since then,
every one in the house offers us a portion of their
rain-water; so, as my husband says, `The peace
principle is the best policy.'
Mr. Beckwith, after making a calculation,
exclaimed
,
Four hundred and sixty-nine dollars is
paid for the rent of this house. The whole property
is not worth four thousand five hundred. But so it
is all over the city; the poor pay rents out of all
proportion
to the rich. With the very poor and vicious
this is inevitablethey are transient tenants, and
their pay uncertain. But the industrious and
honest
should not be obliged to endure such evils as
you suffer, Mrs. Aikin. I trust the attention of
capitalists will be attracted to this subject. Ask
your husband to come to my house this evening.
I am glad to have begun an acquaintance with you,
Mrs. Aikin. It shall not be my fault if it end here.
Mr. Beckwith went his way, and, meditating on
the power of the domestic virtues to enrich a home,
and multiply the good things of this life, he
repeated
,
mentally, those words of which he thought
he had witnessed the illustration:
And seek not what ye shall eat and what ye
shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. For
all these things do the nations of the world seek
after, and your father knoweth that ye have need
of these things. But rather seek ye the kingdom
of God, and all these things shall be added unto
you.
CHAPTER XVIII.
LIGHT IN A DARK PLACE.
On
the morning of Mr. Beckwith's call, another
and very different visiter knocked at Mrs. Aikin's
door, and inquired If there was not a woman, or
creater
, or something of that sort, by the name of
Smith, living there. Mrs. Aikin boded no good,
and, fearful Paulina would overhear the inquiry,
she bade the man enter, answering him
affirmatively
while she closed the door.
You need not be so private, mistress; I am
none of her acquaintance, I can tell you, only as
she under-rented two rooms of me, and went away
owing me.
When the stranger entered, Juliet was reading
to Mr. Barlow. She pressed his arm, whispering,
I know that man. He is horrid cross.
Don't tremble so, my child, he'll not hurt you.
Oh, I ain't afraid of him nowbut I used to
be.
This was said while Mrs. Aikin was
communicating
to the man the small likelihood that he
would get his debt.
I don't expect much, replied the man, of the
like of her, but I've got something that will bring
something more. He took from his pocket a
handkerchief, and, unrolling it, proceeded: After
that woman left my house, she missed a packet,
and came back and made a terrible rummaging;
but another tenant had moved in with a heap of
litter, and nothing could be found of the packet.
Since t'other tenant has packed off 'twixt two days,
and we found this stowed away in the closet.
He took out a small locket and a letter.
That locket was
my
mother's! exclaimed
Juliet.
Was
, child? but it's mine
now
. I don't
believe
,
continued the man, supposing of course that
Mrs. Smith was Juliet's mother, that it ever did
belong to your mother; but you shall judge, good
woman, to Mrs. Aikin. Here is the letterthe
locket was in the letter. He began reading.
`My dear'something, I can't tell that word;
it may be father, and it may be mother; but never
mind, it goes on: `On the bed of death, and with
my poor little girl beside me'
Oh, it was
my own
mother that wrote it!
screamed Juliet; don't let
him
read it!
Forgetting her fears, she sprang forward and
snatched it, repeating, with an imploring look to
Mr. Barlow and Mrs. Aikin, It is mine! it was
my own
mother wrote it!
Mrs. Aikin soothed her, and Mr. Barlow drew
her to him, whispering an assurance that she
should keep it.
What the deuse ails you, child? asked the
man; you are welcome to the letter, though I
guess it will make you all kind o' qualmish to read
it. The locket I'll keep myselfthe casing, I
mean; the picture won't sell for any thing, though
I think it's a pretty, comely-looking person. What
do you think, neighbour? holding it up to Mr.
O 2
Barlow. Mr. Barlow cast his eye on the locket:
he recognised an old likeness of himself; a
sudden
paleness overspread his face; he took the
letter
from Juliet's hand, to him unresisting; his eye
glanced rapidly over it: the blood rushed again to
his cheeks, coloured deeply his pale forehead, and
again retreated. He threw his arms around Juliet,
laid his head on hers, and sobbed out, My child!
Mary! Mary! my child!
Mrs. Aikin guessed the meaning of all this.
She dismissed the man with the assurance that he
should be paid the small sum due to him, and then
left Mr. Barlow to compose himself, and give to
Juliet the joyful explanation of what seemed to
her a riddle.
When she returned she found them calm, and as
happy as they could be; their joy tempered by the
following sad letter:
Letter from Juliet's mother.
My Dear Father
:  On the bed of death,
and with my little girl, who will soon be an
orphan
,
beside me, I write this. My hand is stiff,
and a racking cough interrupts me. I can write
but a few lines at a time. Till last week I hoped
to get well, consumption is so flattering.
Dear father, I never told you any thing but
truth about my situation in America; but I could
not bear to distress you and sister with the whole
truth. You could not help me, so I tried to suffer
patiently; and I never felt alone, for when we
have no human friend nor help, then it is we feel
God to be near. Ronald turned out what I might
have expected when he persuaded me to marry
him against your will and consent. He was
always
headstrongpoor Ronald! We lived
comfortably
in Canada for a while. Oh! what
pleasure
I took in being saving, and making his pay
hold out. An ensign's pay is small, father; and,
for a while after Juliet was born, he seemed to feel
what it was to be a father, and what he owed to
the child God had given him, and it seemed
happiness
enough for him to be with us. Then I wrote
you often, and you know all about that time, father!
How soon it passed! Bad people drew him away
from me, and bad people and hard drinking
hardened
his heart; and often and often, when I have gone
to meet him in the damp night, wild with fear that
something had happened to him, and waited hours
and hours, he has come, and; but, poor
Ronald
!
I can't bear to bring up his sins now! But,
oh! my poor little child, how she has suffered for
his faults! There were times when the sight of
her brought him to a momentary penitence; but
he had no true joy in her. I have seen what bitter
drops conscience has poured into the sweet
fountain
of parental love. I have seen him when the
tones of innocence and the look of love were
cutting
reproaches to him. Poor Ronald!
I suffered, father, in many wayswhen, and
where, and how, there is no use in telling now.
I found patience a great help, and in the darkest
times I could pray for my poor husband. Had he
but turned to the right path, I would have
welcomed
poverty, sickness, hardship of any sort; but
the wounded spirit that cometh from the sin of
those we love, who can bear?
Ronald failed in military duty, and lost his
commission, and changed his name to Brown.
We came to New-York. This was a dark time,
father. I was sometimes, for weeks, alone with
my child. He came to me to die. I remembered
Him
who forgiveth liberally, and upbraideth not.
I watched him, day and night, till he died. May
I not hope for him? but, alas!alas! his life was
a continual violation of God's laws. Towards the
last his mind was gone.Poor Ronald!
I went to the British consul. He was
very
kind
to me; and from some English people, with
true English hearts, he got money enough to send
me and Juliet home to you. I was on board the
ship when, as I wrote to you, symptoms of the
varioloid appeared. I was sent off. Juliet and I
both had the disease. My disappointment
aggravated
it with me. I was left low. I have worked
a little since, and sometimes hoped to earn money
to go home to you. I had spent, in my sickness,
all that was given to me. I have written but once,
hoping always to have something better to write.
But it's all over now! Don't mourn about it,
fathernor you, dear sister,it is God's will, and
nevernever has it seemed hard to me to bend to
his will. When poor Ronald went astray from
His
willthat I felt to be hard.
My little girl
I have laid her in His arms
who bade little children come unto Him. She is
now His; and, indeedindeed, my heart is not
troubled about her.
Thank you, dear father, for long ago sending
me your forgiveness for what you were so kind as
to call my `only disobedience.' I think it is easy
for the good to forgive. As I draw near
home
, I
am always with you in my dreams. I see the
white cottage and the hedge; and last night you
and sister kissed me.
There is a woman here kind to me. I shall
leave a request to the British consul to send Juliet
to you. God has given me his peace, father.
Don't you and sister mourn for me. Let Juliet
take my place. Farewell!once more I kiss
you and sister. Your M. B.
Death came sooner than Mary expected; and
ner child, instead of being placed in the consul's
hands, was apparently left with no other
dependance
than the uncertain charities of a worthless
woman. But He who never forsakes the orphan
committed to him had, as Mr. Barlow expressed
it, led this lost lamb into the right fold. He
steeped Mary's letter in his tearstears of natural
sorrow for her sufferings, and of gratitude that a
husband's unfaithfulness, that poverty and
sickness
,
had all been God's ministers to bring her to
heaven.
CHAPTER XIX.
A DEATH-BED.
A profitable
lesson in the economy of human
life might have been learned in the dying Paulina's
apartment. Her last excess, her last draught of
gin, taken in an excited and feverish state, had
accelerated her disease. She had a raging fever,
and her cough was attended by spasms that, at
each recurrence, threatened her with instant death.
Charlotte, after in vain searching for some
comfortable
garments among the relics of Paulina's
evil daysafter turning over stained silk dresses,
tattered gauzes, yellow blonde laces, and tangled
artificial flowers, had furnished from her own
stores clean apparel suitable for a sick woman.
Oh, Lottie, please, said Paulina, pointing to
the various articles of old finery that hung about
the room, or over the sides of her broken
bandboxes
,
please put them all out of my sightthey
seem like so many witnesses against methey
taunt me for my sin and folly. How good this
clean snug cap feelshow kind it is of you to
lend me these things!
I have plenty, Paulina; we always calculate
to have a good store of necessaries. Susan and I
think, if we don't want them, they will come in play
for somebodyand, with a little industry and
forecast
,
they are easily got. You can buy a dozen
such caps as that of mine for the half of what one
of yours cost, Paulina.
I can't help that now, retorted Paulina,
pettishly
;
I did not mean to speak so, she added,
after a moment's pausebut oh, Lottie, every
thing stings me.
And I am sure, said the gentle Charlotte, I
did not mean to hurt your feelings; but I did not
know but you might think it strange such a poor
person as I should boast of abundance.
You poor, Lottie!you poor!oh, I can tell
you what it is to be poor. To be without any
worldly possessions is not to be poor, for you have
a treasure laid up in heaven. To be what the
world calls friendless is not to be poor, for you
have God and conscience for friends. But to be
as I am, memory tormenting!without hopeto
have no inward peaceno store of pleasant
thoughts of good done! Oh, this is poverty.
Poverty
is nothing
outside
, Lottie.
For a moment, Paulina's mind would seem to
have more even than its natural strength and
clearness
:
but such bright intervals were short, and
succeeded by hours when she seemed to be
heavily
sleeping away her existence; and Charlotte
would long to see her awaken to a consciousness
of her ebbing life, and employing the little time
that remained in preparation for her departure.
But, alas for those who leave their preparation for
the death-bed! who defer to a few suffering hours
the work for which life is given!
Who would have thought, Lottie, said Susan,
as the sisters sat together, watching Paulina's
troubled sleep, that you would have lived to
nurse her on her death-bed! It is teaching to look
at you and then at her.
And, as Susan said, it was
teaching
. It taught
that, if the laws of nature, which are the laws of
God, are obeyed, the frailest, most delicate
constitution
may be preserved; and that the most
vigorous
health must be destroyed by a violation of
those laws. Charlotte, by strict temperance, by
regular exercise, by prudence and thoughtfulness,
had preserved the little remnant of health left by
the cruel accident she had endured in her
childhood
.
But, what was far better, by the religious
performance of her dutiesby contentment, both
with the gifts and the
denials
of Providenceby
forgetting herself, and remembering everybody
elseby loving, and (a most sure consequence)
being loved in turnshe had preserved that sweet
serenity of spirit that shone through her pale face,
and all those faculties in active operation, that,
slender and fragile as she was, made her the
comfort
of her family; the dear Aunt Lottie of the
home she blessed.
Fifteen years before Paulina was the picture of
health, and in possession of the virtues (or rather
accidents) which are usually found with a sound
and vigorous constitution. She was
good-humoured
,
bright, courageous, and kind-hearted. But,
alas! she was brought up by an ignorant mother,
in ignorance and the excessive love of pleas
ure. She was pretty, and she was flattered at
home and abroad. That love of dress which
pervades
all classes of women, which grows with
their growth and strengthens with their strength,
which is cherished by the conversation of their
own sex and the flattery of the other, which
degrades
the rich and ruins so many poor girls, was
one of the most efficient causes of Paulina's
destruction
.
[11]
[11]
A gentleman, whose uncommon sagacity and rare
benevolence
have had an ample field of observation and employment
in the office which he for a long while held, of superintendent
of the House of Refuge in this city, has said that he believed
the love of dress was a most efficient cause of the
degradation
and misery of the young females of the city. If this is so,
should not the reformation begin among the educated and
reflecting
?
Among those who can afford indulgence? How can
a lady, whose presses are teeming with French millinery and
embroidery, enjoin simplicity and economy on her domestics?
But this is a subject that demands a volume; or, rather, that
demands examples instead of precepts.
Do you remember, continued Susan, how
clear and full her eye was? and now how sunken,
and those yellow, dropsical-looking bags about it;
and her cheeks, I remember father used to say they
looked like rare-ripes; dear me! how the bones
stick out now where the fair round flesh was; and
how like old tripe it looks where she has had the
paint on; and her lips, what a bright cherry-red
pair they were: dear! dear! how blue they are;
and see her neck and arms, Lottie, that were so
plump and white, now how shrivelled and skinny
they look. Dear Lottie, she added, I can't help
saying it, as I turn my eye from Paulina to you;
you seem like a temple in which the spirit of God
dwelleth. Oh! what a comfort it is to have
cherished, and not abused. God's good gifts!
P
Hush! Susan, she is waking! and poor
Paulina
awoke from a troubled dream, coughing and
gasping. Oh! said she, as soon as she could
speak, I thought I was dead and in misery, but
I am still living; and, Lottie, does not the Bible
sayI have almost forgotten all I knew about the
Biblebut does it not say there is hope for the
living?
Yes, Paulina; if they repent of their evil
deeds, and turn to the Lord, there is with him
plenteous redemption.
Does it say so?a suffocating fit of
coughing
interrupted her. My mind, she continued,
when she could get her breath, My mind is so
confused, I have so given up my thoughts to folly
and sin, that I can't even think good thoughts;
how can I repent?I am so sleepy and, as she
yet spoke, the words died away on her lips, and a
heavy sleep came over her, from which she
started
as from a nightmare.
I have done one good thing, she said: I
was good to Juliet!
That should comfort you! said Susan, seizing,
as eagerly as a drowning man catches at a straw,
at Paulina's single consoling recollection.
But, Susan, I was not kind as you would have
beensuch as I can't be so. I did keep my evil
life out of her sight; I have always paid something
extra, that she might have a little room to herself.
That was considerate, Paulina.
Do you think so, Lottie? Dear me! if I had
only realized how soon it would come to this, I
should have lived so differently! My God! but
the other day we were playing together in Essex,
and now! Do you think me very,
very
near
death? she added, rightly interpreting the
expression
of her friends' faces.
You cannot have long to live, replied
Charlotte
,
in a voice of the tenderest pity.
Then why don't you send for a minister?
We will, if you wish it, Paulina.
I do, I dopray be quick! Susan went to
the door and despatched a messenger, while
Paulina
looked eagerly after her; but, when Susan
returned
to the bed, the poor creature shook her head
and said, with the awful solemnity of deep
conviction
What
good can he do me?
It lieth
between
me and my Maker!
Her lips then
murmured
a low, broken prayer;suddenly stopping, she
implored Lottie to pray for her. I cannot pray,
she said; don't let me go to sleep, Susan.
Susan
chafed her temples and hands, while Charlotte
knelt and besought pardon for the dying-woman, as
a confiding child asks favours from a parent she
supremely loves. Her prayer expressed her faith
in the compassions of God, as revealed by his son;
her face shone with love and mercy, from her soul,
his faint image. But poor Paulina was past all
comfort. When Charlotte finished, she said,
faintly
Say
it again, Lottie, I could not hear you.
Come nearer, I don't see you!Give me air!did
mother speak!no, I mean the minister!has he
come?tell Julietno, not thatthank you,
Susan
my
God!it's so sudden!help me,
Lottie
!
And thus, uttering at intervals broken
sentences
,
more and more incoherent, she continued
almost unconscious of the ministrations of her
friends, till she sunk into a lethargy which ended
in death.
The sisters wept over her such tears as angels
might shed. I remember, said Susan, almost
crying my eyes out when mother died; I have
often cried, Lottie, to see you patiently bearing
cruel pain, and I cried till my tears seemed all
spent when my angel baby diedbut I never shed
such bitter tears as these; there is no sight in this
world so sad as the death-bed of the sinner!
But, Lottie, don't you think we were some comfort
to her?
Two days after, as Aikin and his family,
according
to the village custom of his native place,
were following the remains of Paulina to their last
abode, they were intercepted by a long train of
funeral carriages. In the first, in deep weeds, was
Morris Finley, following the body of his only son
William Arthur. The boy had died suddenly, and,
according to the common saying, of a most
mysterious
disease. Such mysteries are easily
solved
if we would honestly look at the truth. The
boy's stomach had been vitiated from infancy by
all sorts of delicacies and luxuries, permitted by
his foolish mother. The instrument, strained to its
utmostand a slight accidenta trifling excess,
destroyed him.
We need not conjecture the reflections of
Morris
Finley on this occasion, when, for a little while
at least, he must have felt his wealth mocking him
with its emptiness.
CHAPTER XX.
THE CONCLUSION.
It
was early in the October following the
winter
of Paulina's death that Mr. Aikin said, one fine
day, to his children, Come, if mother says yes,
we'll all go down and see the new house.
As mother always said yes when any
reasonable
pleasure was offered to the children, hats and
shawls were half on before the little monosyllable
was fairly uttered. Come, danfather, I tant half
see it if you don't see it, said little Phil; and,
Come, Aunt Lottie, we sha'n't call it seeing it if
you don't see it, said the rest of the children;
and, You and Juliet must go, Mr. Barlow, said
Aikin, and tell us how you like your new
quarters
;
and so, illustrating the truth that governed
this family, that the good and happiness of one
was the good and happiness of all, they set forth.
Don't you and Juliet walk so fast, called out
little Phil to his eager brother William, I tant
hardly hold danfather up, he stumbles so!
Phil is the most thoughtful and careful child
you ever had, Susan; I tell you, he takes after
me.
Susan, dutiful daughter as she was, could not
but smile at the particular virtues her father had
selected to fix the resemblance on, as she replied,
I wish he may grow up half as good, father.
P 2
Aunt Lottie, said little Ruth, don't Mr.
Beckwith getting this house done so soon for
father put you in mind of Mr. Barlow's story about
Aladdin's lamp?
I never take much notice of such stories,
Ruth, but it puts me in mind of those words in the
Bible, `The liberal man deviseth liberal things;
and the good that he purposeth, that he doeth
quickly.'
I never knew anybody like you, Aunt Lottie;
you always remember something in the Bible that
seems to suit.
Because, dear, I read the Bible more than all
other books, and there is something in it fitting all
occasions.
I love to read the Bible with you, Aunt Lottie,
for it seems as if
As if what? said Ruth.
I know what is in my mind, but I don't know as
I can express it. When our schoolmistress reads
it to us, it seems as if she read it because she
thought she ought to; but you seem to read it
because
you love it.
None should attempt to impart religious
sentiments
to children who do not feel them. The
letter killeth, the spirit giveth life.
Where shall we begin first, said Harry Aikin,
at the kitchen or parlour?
Parlour!are we going to have a parlour?
Oh, that's what mother has been making the new
carpet for!
Well, here it is, you see, with nice blinds, and
a good grate, and all finished off neatly, so that
you will have good reason for keeping every thing
in order; and here is a place for books (he
opened the doors)bless me, it is half full
already! The children crowded round, and
eagerly
took down the books, and found them to be
presents
from each member of the Beckwith family
to each member of the Aikins, down to Cobwebs
to catch Flies, and Mother Goose's Melodies,
for little Phil. The last grandfather averred to be
nothing new-fangled, and about the divertingest
book that was ever writ for children. To confess
the truth, Uncle Phil's chief lore was derived from
these immortal lyrics.
We wish that some of our friends whom, in
splendid mansions, we have heard fretting and
repining
because they had not this elegance here,
and that improvement there, could have heard the
exclamations and seen the sparkling eyes of our
humble friends as they surveyed their new
tenement
.
How nice, exclaimed Anne, this
parlour
will be for our `sociables!'it will seem
like a sociable every evening, with only our own
family.
So it will, Anne, cried Uncle Phil, rubbing
his hands, I declare it's as pleasantena'most
as the old house in Essex. Uncle Phil's eye
caught the smile on his daughter's lips: I know,
gals
, he added, that was kind o' shattered when
we left, and this is snugger and more fixed up; but,
after all, it has not
that look
.
You are quite right, father, replied Susan;
and, as she spoke, the loving matron's eye turned
to her husband: there is nothing can have
that
look
that our first love has.
This little bedroom is next to Mr. Barlow's
room, and just big enough for a single bedthis
must be for Juliet, decided one voice, and echoed
many others, as they passed out of the back room
into a small apartment fitted up with presses and
drawers, and ventilated and lighted by glazed
panels above the doors. On the second floor were
three rooms, in the largest a Franklin; and Mrs.
Aikin, remembering Mr. Beckwith had made
inquiries
as to what mode of warming her room
Charlotte preferred, at once assigned this to her.
To be sure this is Aunt Lottie's, said little Ruth;
there is the very picture, Aunt Lottie, you was
explaining to me at the print-shop window when
Mrs. Beckwith stopped to speak to us.
`Christ healing the sick' is the right picture
for your room, Lottie, said her sister.
Oh, Mrs. Beckwith is too good, said the
grateful
Lottie.
Mrs. Beckwith is very good, but nothing in the
world is
too
good for you, Aunt Lottie; and, No,
indeed! and, No, indeed! was echoed by the
children.
We must not detain our readers with further
particulars; suffice it to say, the rooms were well
ventilated; presses and drawers abounded; the
kitchen had every convenience to facilitate order
and lighten labour; there was a pump, that
supplied
water from a copious cisterna draina
large pantry, and close cupboards, &c. &c.; and
all the conveniences, from garret to cellar,
producing
such an amount of comfort to a worthy family,
did not, as Mr. Beckwith demonstrated by his
accounts
,
cost so much as many a single article of
ornamental furniture, nor twice as much as a
single pocket-handkerchief, or embroidered cape,
sold daily by Mr. Stewart to the ladies of our city!
In the evening, at their own dwelling, the house
naturally was the subject of conversation. How
very lucky, said Uncle Phil, that Mr. Beckwith
happened to build a house that suits us to a T!
It is not luck, father, said Harry Aikin, when
things suit precisely. Mr. Beckwith has studied
the condition and wants of the labouring classes.
He tells me, the attention of many rich men has
been turned to the miserable tenements of the
poorer classes; and he says, they believe the want
of comfort and convenience about them to be a
great evil to societythey think the intemperance
of many men may be traced to this cause. To say
nothing of the crowds huddled together in filthy
unwholesome alleys, even the better houses of the
poor are discouraging to the women: they get
wearied out with their necessary work, and no
strength and time left to clean a house that always
wants cleaning. The poor husband has been
working hard all day; comes home at night to a
filthy, dark, cold roomhis wife cross, or half sick
and dumpish, and crying childrenno wonder he
goes out to the corner grocery, that looks so light
and cheerful!
Then, after all, father, it's the woman, and not
the house, that drives him off?
Ah, Will, the poor wife is disheartened; we
are weak creatures, my son, and need help on
every
side.
I am sure you and mother have not had so
many helps.
Have not we? I'll tell you some of my helps,
Will: I had a good education, I do not mean as
to learning, that is only one part of it; I was taught
to use my faculties. But, first, and best of all,
I early learned to seek the favour of God, and
the approval of conscience. I have always had a
cheerful home, a clean room to come to, clean
children
,
and a nice wife. Your mother has
performed
her duties, great and small; as to the small, she
never has failed a day since we were married to
put on her
t'other gown
at evening, and a clean
cap with a riband bow, most always of blue, the
colour she knows I like best. Her trade has
helped
us through many a hard-rubbing day; and it
has given me peace of mind, for I know, if I were
taken from you, she could and would support you
without running to any widows' societies or
assistance
societies. As to other
helps
, here has been
your good grandfather setting us examples of
kindness
,
and tending each of you as you came along;
and your dear Aunt Lottie always a blessed help.
Ah, yes! such a comfort! interposed Susan.
And then, Heaven-directed, came Mr. Barlow
to give you better instruction; and, finally, Mr.
Beckwith to help us to a house, and take nothing
from our independence; for he says the rent,
which does not exceed more than that we now
pay, will yield him eight per cent. for the money
he has invested. He says he can afford the house
lower to me than to some others, for he is sure
of being punctually paid; and sure you will not
mutilate and deface, as most children do, shaving
the doors with penknives, breaking windows, and
destroying every way. So, you see, that virtue,
and good habits, and manners (which are the
lesser
virtues), are not only in the highest sense
treasures
,
they are
money
to you. In the labouring
class, property is a sign of good morals. In this
country nobody sinks into deep poverty
slumps
through
, as your grandfather says, except by some
vice, directly or indirectly. There are, perhaps,
a few exceptions; I have known one, and but
one. Come here, Ruth; is my sermon tiring
you?
No, indeed, father, I always like your
preaching
;
but I was thinking.
Of what, Ruth?
That the scholars at our school don't know Mr.
Beckwith; if they did, they would not call rich
people so hateful.
Children are excellent judges.
But, father, their folks tell them.
Observe for yourselves, my children, and don't
trust to what others tell you. If you make good
use of your bodily eyes, and the eyes of your mind,
you will see that Providence has bound the rich
and the poor by one chain. Their interests are
the same; the prosperity of one is the prosperity
of all. The fountains are with the rich, but they
are no better than a stagnant pool till they flow in
streams to the labouring people. The enterprise
and success of the merchant give us
employment
and rich rewards for our labour. We are
dependant on them, but they are quite as
dependant
on us. If there were none of these hateful
rich people, Ruth, who, think you, would build
hospitals
,
and provide asylums for orphans, and for
the deaf and dumb, and the blind?
I never thought of that, father!
There are many older than you, my child, who
come to wrong conclusions for want of thinking.
Now, Harry Aikin, said Uncle Phil, who (as
our readers may be) was getting tired and sleepy,
I don't see the use of so much thinking;
thinking
is dreadful puzzling work, I tell you! The
whole of it is, you must just do your duty
thoroughly
,
and then you'll be contented in this world, and
happy in the next; and poverty or riches won't
make a straw's difference either way.
But 'tis a comfort, father, said Susan, to the
poor, to
feel
that there is nothing low in poverty
to remember that the greatest, wisest, and best
Being
that ever appeared on earth had no part nor
lot in the riches of this world; and that, for our
sakes, he became poor.
To be sure it is, Susyto be sure it is.Honoured Sir
As father and I have
concluded
to leave to-morrow, will be much obliged if
you will send in your bill this afternoon, if
convenient
.
As, from all that's passed, sir, you may
conclude
that I ain't in circumstances to pay down, I
would make bold to say that you need not scruple,
as I have a large sum of money by me, given to
me by my best friend, father and Susan excepted.
Father sends his respectful duty to you, sir, and I
mine, with many thanks; but neither money nor
thanks can pay your kindness; and daily, respected
sir, shall I ease my heart by remembering you in
my prayers at the throne of grace, where we must
all appear alike poor and needy, but where may
you ever come with a sure foundation of hope,
through our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
I remain, sir, your faithful friend and
well-wisher
,
Charlotte May
.To which note the doctor replied
My good friend Charlotte
I shall preface
my answer to your note with letting you a little
into my professional affairs. I do not make it a rule
to attend the poor gratuitously, for many reasons;
but principally because I have observed that what
is got for nothing is seldom valued. I only take
care to charge them according to their ability to
pay. You, my child, are an exception to most of
my patientsyou have given me a lesson of meek
and cheerful submission that is inestimableI am
your debtor, not you mine. Besides, strictly, I
have no
doctor's
account against you. I have
prescribed
no medicine, and given you no advice that
any man of sense and experience might not have
given; therefore, my good girl, I have no claim on
that `
large sum of money
,' which, God bless your
`best friend' for having given you. But forget
not, my friend, your promise to remember me in
your prayers; I have much faith in the `prayers
of saints.' My parting regards to your good
father
,
and please deliver the accompanying parcels
as directed. They are from my son and daughter,
who hastily join me in esteem for you and yours.
God bless you, my dear child.
Your sincere friend,My dear Susan
It is a long time since I
have written to you; but I have been in much
perplexity
and anxiety, and have been waiting to see
daylight. We have failed, Finley and I, as might
have been expected; neither of us having any
experience
in the business we undertook. As soon
as I found we could not meet our notes, I made a
thorough examination into our affairs, and found we
could just pay our debts and no more. So to-morrow
we close the concern. I have many times
regretted
I did not take Charlotte's advice, and not enter
into a business for which I was not qualified. I
would now gladly return to my trade, but
confinement
to business, and anxiety, have had an
unfavourable
effect on my health, and I am more
than ever troubled with that old pain in my breast.
I sometimes think, Susan, a sight of your sunny
face would cure me; that and all good things I
trust will come; in the meantime, patience. In
prosperity and adversity, my heart ever turns
towards
my dear Essex friends, who must believe me
their friend and brother,
Harry Aikin
.Dear Susan
My prospects, since the
breakup
last spring, are much improved; but particulars
in my next. All I want to know is, whether you
will share my lot with me? Pray write by return
of post, and believe me now, as you well know I
have ever been, though I never put it into words
before, your friend and true lover,
Harry Aikin
.
P. S.I know, dear Susan, you are not a
person
to take or refuse a husband for any thing
separate
from himself; but I may mislead you by what
I said above. I am still what the world calls a
poor manparticulars in my next.P. S.
Dear Harry
I wrote this letter last
evening, and shall send it; for why should I, if I
could, conceal my real feelings from you? Since
we were playfellows at school, I have loved you
best, and you only, Harry; for the time to come, I
must love you only as a brother. Oh, how strange
it is, that the black and the white threads are
always
twisted together in human life. Last evening
I was so happy writing this letter; but, when I
went into the bedroom, Lottie's face was covered
with tears; and she spoke of our separation, and
all flashed upon me at once. What could she and
father do without me? They do now their full
part towards keeping the family together, but they
can neither of them bring in any thing, and they
would be obliged to look to the town for support.
Is not that awful to think of? So you see, dear
Harry, I
cannot
leave themour path is plain, and,
as dear Lottie would say, may we have grace to
walk therein. It is very dark now, Harry; but, if
we only try to do right, the day will soon break,
and grow brighter and brighter. Please don't say
one word to persuade me off my resolution, for we
are weak creatures at best, and we should stand
together, and strengthen and uphold one another.
Above all, don't say a word about my reasons to
father and Lottie; and believe me, dear Harry, not
a bit less your affectionate friend because I can't
forsake them.
Susan May
.Dearest Susan
Forsake `father and
Lottie
!'
that you never shall. When I wrote my last,
it was only to get that blessed little word
yes
from
you, for I must make sure of my title before I laid
out the future. One thing only I am a little hurt
at. Could you think I could leave out Charlotte in
my plans?a dear sister, counsellor, and friend
she has ever been to meand your good father,
who so much needs some one to care for him? Ah,
Susan, I have had my
reflections
too; and I think
our path is plain before us, and, with good
resolution
on our part, and Charlotte's prayers to help us,
we
shall have
grace to walk therein. But I must
tell you all, and then look for your final answer.
When I invested my patrimony in the shoe
concern with Finley, I expected soon to be in a
situation to offer you my hand, and begin
house-keeping
in New-York with four members to the
family, for never once have I thought of dividing
you from your father and Lottie. I did not tell you
my hopes and plans, because I feared I should not
after that have patience to wait as long as prudence
required. One thing I am sure of, dear Susan,
from my own experiencethat a virtuous love is
the greatest earthly security a young man can have
against the temptations and dangers that beset him.
I am sure my affection for you has made me
diligent
in business, frugal, earnest in my pursuits, and
patient in my disappointments. If I had felt (which,
thank God, I never did) any inclination to forbidden
pleasures, to dangerous company, to dissipation of
any sort, the thought of you would have been a
shield to me. Knowing you and Charlotte so well,
and the memory of my excellent mother, have
given me a reverence for female virtuea belief
in the power and beauty of goodness in a woman
and to this, Susan, love naturally followsthat
pure love that is ordained by God to lead to the
holy institution of marriage.But what are my
thoughts running to? Don't laugh at me, and I
will go back to my business statements.
When I began business I took lodgings at a
carman's. He is a good friend of mine, and with
him I could live at a small expense in a quiet
family
.
I have avoided living or associating with
those who had more means than I, for that leads to
expense. I have never spent a shilling on
superfluities
,
for which I have now much reason to be
thankful; for, even if I had escaped that dreadful
load, unpaid debts, I might, like many other young
men, have acquired habits of expense on the credit
of future gains. The gains may not comethe
habits remain, like so many tormentors. When I
was asked by a friend to go to an oyster-house, or
the theatre, or the circus, or to take a bottle of
porter
,
or drink a glass of whiskey, I declined. I
knew, if I did it for my friend's sake this time, I
might do it for my own the next. I had my
treats
my pleasant thoughts of the time when I should
have a table of my own, and faces round it that I
loved. It is sure we can't have every thing in this
world, and the thing is to make up our mind what
we
must have
, and what we can do without. You
can guess
my must have
.
When I found Finley and I were going
behind-hand
,
I determined to stop short, and not, as many
do, put off the evil day, plunging deeper and deeper,
making enemies, and making plenty of work for
repentance. When our affairs were settled up I
had a hundred dollars in my pocket, and no one to
look me in the face and say I owed him a shilling,
or had wronged him of one. The next thing was
to determine on what business I should follow.
You know my breast was much weakened by
sitting
over my lapstone when I was growing fast.
It is a bad trade to put a growing boy to. I could
not return to it. A farm in one of the free western
states seemed to me the happiest lot in the world
for a poor man; but there were hardships in the
beginning, and, though you and I would not have
minded them, your father and Lottie could not have
stood them. A farm at Essex I dared not think of:
a man must have some capital and knowledge,
practice and skill, to go ahead in New-England on
a farm, and I had none of these. While I was
deliberating
,
my good friend Mr. Loomis, the carman,
determined to move to Ohio. He advised me to
take up his business, and offered to sell me his
horse and cart on very reasonable terms, and to
recommend me to his employers. There were
many reasons to decide me to take his advice. I
find exercise in the open air the best medicine for
the pain in my breast. Carting is a sure and
regular
business. I have observed that the carmen in
this city, those
whose carts are never seen standing
before groceries
, are a healthy, cheerful-looking
class of men. They go slowly but surely ahead.
They can generally manage to take their meals
with their families, and to spend all their evenings
at homea great point to a man who loves home
faces and home pleasures as I do. Some persons
think it is going down a step to go from
shop-keeping
to carting; but you and I, Susan, have our own
notions about going up and down, and both think it
is what is in a man, and not what is out of him,
that humbles or exalts him. Some think that most
genteel which brings them nearest to being idle
gentlemen; but, when I am driving through
Broadway
on my cart, do you think I would change
places with those slim-looking young men I see
parading up and down the street, looking like
tailors'
walking advertisementsbringing nothing to
passdoing nothing with the time God gives them
in this world, and gives them
for what?
Oh, it
would take a minister to answer that.
I might have gone into trade of some kind, but
I have not health to be shut up behind a counter;
and besides, in my opinion, a shop is a fitting place
for women only, they being (don't be affronted,
Susy) the weaker sex. You see now how my case
stands. I have no debts. I have good health for
the business I have chosen, industry, and a
faculty
I may boast. So I think I may marry in this
blessed
country of ours, where there is sure
employment
,
and a man is certain of getting his earnings.
Besides, dear Susan, if any thing happens to me,
you have your trade to depend upon. Give my
best love to Charlotte, and tell her, besides being
a main comfort, she will be a real help to us; for
while she is doing the light work, your needle will
be making money. If your father has any
scruples
about coming, pray tell him the rent of his
Essex place will pay for the rent of a room here
G
and save us from near neighbours we may not like.
Am I not
calculating
, Susan? But is it not better
to calculate beforehand than to grumble afterward?
I am sure I am right, so far as I can, to secure
independence
to your father and Charlotte; and if,
after all, they must take something from us, those
who are so generous in giving will be also
generous
in receiving, and they will not grudge us the
best part, it being more blessed to give than to
receive
.
There is one thing I can scarcely bear the
thoughts oftaking you all from that pleasant little
spot in Essex, where you have
riches
for the eye
that all the money in New-York cannot buy
in
the
cityplenty of sweet air and pure water;
[4]
[4]
Has any one ever calculated the amount of wealth and
comfort to be produced to the labouring classes by the
introduction
of pure water into the city of New-York? Health and
cleanliness are sources of wealth, and of comfort
inappreciable
.
and
your garden, and your little courtyard, with its
rose-bushes, morning-glories, pionies, and marvels
of Peru. But, after all, dear Susan, there are
feelings
worth giving up the very best of outward
things for; and if we secure affection, and
kindness
,
and so forth, we sha'n't have made a bad
bargain
of it, shall we? We may be what the world
calls poor, and miscals, in my estimation. Let
us begin, in the fear and love of God, with a
determination
to do our dutyrich in love for one
another, and at peace with all men; and if worst
comes to worst, why, that will be
outside
poverty.
I do not fear it, do you? Answer this without fail
by return of post. Much duty and love to your
(my?) father and Charlotte, and believe me, till
death, your friend and lover,
Harry Aikin
.
P. S.I was so taken up with one subject that
I forgot to mention that Finley was married last
evening to a Miss Nichols. Her father entered
into speculation last winter, and is said to be rich.
Finley says he never gave Paulina Clark reason to
expect to marry him; perhaps not in words; but,
the old proverb is, `actions speak loudest.' To my
mind, a man who
attends
to a girl, and then quits
her, adds hypocrisy to falsehood. I foresaw how
this matter would end when I heard that Paulina's
mother had made that
third
marriage. Finley
would have liked a handsome wife, but he
must
have
a rich one. He has set out in the world for
what he calls the
main chance;
I have my
main
chance
too, and that depends on you. Poor
Paulina
!
But I'll not tell bad news (which may not be
true)
in this
letter.
H. A.Letter from Juliet's mother.
My Dear Father
:  On the bed of death,
and with my little girl, who will soon be an
orphan
,
beside me, I write this. My hand is stiff,
and a racking cough interrupts me. I can write
but a few lines at a time. Till last week I hoped
to get well, consumption is so flattering.
Dear father, I never told you any thing but
truth about my situation in America; but I could
not bear to distress you and sister with the whole
truth. You could not help me, so I tried to suffer
patiently; and I never felt alone, for when we
have no human friend nor help, then it is we feel
God to be near. Ronald turned out what I might
have expected when he persuaded me to marry
him against your will and consent. He was
always
headstrongpoor Ronald! We lived
comfortably
in Canada for a while. Oh! what
pleasure
I took in being saving, and making his pay
hold out. An ensign's pay is small, father; and,
for a while after Juliet was born, he seemed to feel
what it was to be a father, and what he owed to
the child God had given him, and it seemed
happiness
enough for him to be with us. Then I wrote
you often, and you know all about that time, father!
How soon it passed! Bad people drew him away
from me, and bad people and hard drinking
hardened
his heart; and often and often, when I have gone
to meet him in the damp night, wild with fear that
something had happened to him, and waited hours
and hours, he has come, and; but, poor
Ronald
!
I can't bear to bring up his sins now! But,
oh! my poor little child, how she has suffered for
his faults! There were times when the sight of
her brought him to a momentary penitence; but
he had no true joy in her. I have seen what bitter
drops conscience has poured into the sweet
fountain
of parental love. I have seen him when the
tones of innocence and the look of love were
cutting
reproaches to him. Poor Ronald!
I suffered, father, in many wayswhen, and
where, and how, there is no use in telling now.
I found patience a great help, and in the darkest
times I could pray for my poor husband. Had he
but turned to the right path, I would have
welcomed
poverty, sickness, hardship of any sort; but
the wounded spirit that cometh from the sin of
those we love, who can bear?
Ronald failed in military duty, and lost his
commission, and changed his name to Brown.
We came to New-York. This was a dark time,
father. I was sometimes, for weeks, alone with
my child. He came to me to die. I remembered
Him
who forgiveth liberally, and upbraideth not.
I watched him, day and night, till he died. May
I not hope for him? but, alas!alas! his life was
a continual violation of God's laws. Towards the
last his mind was gone.Poor Ronald!
I went to the British consul. He was
very
kind
to me; and from some English people, with
true English hearts, he got money enough to send
me and Juliet home to you. I was on board the
ship when, as I wrote to you, symptoms of the
varioloid appeared. I was sent off. Juliet and I
both had the disease. My disappointment
aggravated
it with me. I was left low. I have worked
a little since, and sometimes hoped to earn money
to go home to you. I had spent, in my sickness,
all that was given to me. I have written but once,
hoping always to have something better to write.
But it's all over now! Don't mourn about it,
fathernor you, dear sister,it is God's will, and
nevernever has it seemed hard to me to bend to
his will. When poor Ronald went astray from
His
willthat I felt to be hard.
My little girl
I have laid her in His arms
who bade little children come unto Him. She is
now His; and, indeedindeed, my heart is not
troubled about her.
Thank you, dear father, for long ago sending
me your forgiveness for what you were so kind as
to call my `only disobedience.' I think it is easy
for the good to forgive. As I draw near
home
, I
am always with you in my dreams. I see the
white cottage and the hedge; and last night you
and sister kissed me.
There is a woman here kind to me. I shall
leave a request to the British consul to send Juliet
to you. God has given me his peace, father.
Don't you and sister mourn for me. Let Juliet
take my place. Farewell!once more I kiss
you and sister. Your M. B.
Death came sooner than Mary expected; and
ner child, instead of being placed in the consul's
hands, was apparently left with no other
dependance
than the uncertain charities of a worthless
woman. But He who never forsakes the orphan
committed to him had, as Mr. Barlow expressed
it, led this lost lamb into the right fold. He
steeped Mary's letter in his tearstears of natural
sorrow for her sufferings, and of gratitude that a
husband's unfaithfulness, that poverty and
sickness
,
had all been God's ministers to bring her to
heaven.