CHAPTER I.
I did but ask a kiss, and yet that boon
Which she bestows on ev'ry morsel that
Her lips receive, was scornfully denied.
O! woman, thou art lavish in thy gifts
To those who cannot prize them; but to those
Who estimate their worth a thousand fold,
Thou art a very niggard.
The Sultan
.
The
American prisoners were confined in the
Walnut street jail, and, as if in mockery, even the
very building in which the declaration of independence
was proclaimed, was also converted into a prison
house. Joy was again in the camp of the invader,
and `grim-visaged war had smoothed his wrinkled
front, and capered nimbly in a lady's chamber.'
Corwin, who was among the prisoners, suffered
much from his wound and neglect. He was looked
upon as a maniac, and too frequently we find that the
loss of reason is attended by the loss of sympathy in
the bosoms of others. As soon as man ceases to
maintain an equality with his fellow man, he has little
to hope for from his compassion. So it was with
Corwin
.
He daily became more pitiable in his appearance,
and frequently did he exclaim, in the language of the
weeping prophet, `Our inheritance is turned to
strangers
,
our houses to aliens. We are orphans and
fatherless
,
our mothers are as widows.'
In consequence of his apparent imbecility of mind,
after a few days imprisonment he was permitted to go
at large. His mental disorder had increased during
his brief confinement, but on returning to his usual
course of life, there was a gradual improvement in the
health of both body and mind. He had sighed for
action
,
and being restrained in his movements, his
imagination
preyed upon itself. There was no outward
object to relieve it from one isolated thought, that
remained
immovable, and burnt like a living coal. The
morbid mind, when excited, finds relief from a
corresponding
motion in the body, but as this was denied
him, there was every prospect of poor Corwin soon
becoming a fit subject for a receptacle of maniacs.
Timely release saved him from a fate the most
appalling
to those stricken as he had been.
Mauns Talman was confined in the State House,
with others captured at Germantown. He had too
long experienced privation, to feel acutely this reverse
of fortune, and as he never permitted more than one
idea at a time to enter his mind, he was not much
annoyed
by unpleasant reflections. Your single minded
man is a happy fellow. The thought with which
honest
Mauns now laboured, was of a nature to call all
his powers into action. It was simply this. He was
in prison, and the question occurred, how was he to
get out again? It was a puzzling question, but it
pleased our philosophical Swede so much, that he
studied
night and day to give a satisfactory answer; and
what may not man accomplish when he concentrates
his whole power upon a single point?
The prisoners were at times permitted to walk in
the public square in which the building stood, and
1*
tradition tells us that it was not unusual to see them
fed there as swine by their captors. Victuals was
thrown down on the earth before them, and as famine
compelled them to partake of it, their coarse meal was
imbittered by the unmanly jeers and jests of those who
had them in charge. While we recoil at the instances
of barbarity recorded in the history of the earlier ages
of the world, let us turn to the record of modern times,
and philanthropy, instead of boasting of her triumph,
should decorate her brows with a cypress wreath.
The sun was declining rapidly in the west, and many
of the prisoners were in the yard contemplating the
beauties of a fine autumn evening. Among the number
was sergeant Talman, but he was apparently too much
engaged with his one idea to remark the splendor of
the setting sun, or attend to the mournful dirge of the
wind as it passed over the faded beauties of nature.
He resembled Sterne's starling, and their constant cry
was much the sameI cannot get out, said the
bird; How the devil shall I get out? said the
sergeant
.
In the midst of his reflections several soldiers
entered
the yard, bearing food for the evening meal.
They approached where the group was standing, and
emptied their baskets on the bare earth. A scramble
ensued among the prisoners, which was considered
highly comical by those who kept guard over them.
Many a coarse joke was passed, and no matter how
pointless, it passed currently, and elicited shouts of
laughter, for those who are disposed to boisterous
mirth care not upon what garbage they feed. When
wit failed, practical jests were called in requisition,
such as casting a piece of food at a distance, and
tripping
the poor fellow who hastened to secure it. Of
all created beings, man is the only one that laughs;
and it appears to be his constant study to excite this
peculiar faculty. He treats life as a jest, and death as
the same. With or without a cause, his laugh he must
have. If other creatures were similarly endowed, what
a noisy world it would be, for the welkin would
incessantly
ring with scoffs at the scoffer. But happily for
man, he has the laugh altogether on his own side.
Mauns stood at a short distance from the group, and
made no attempt to secure any of the food. Indeed,
he appeared unconscious of what was going forward.
What is the matter with that maypole, that he has
no appetite for his supper? said Gordon, who was
among the crowd. His head was bandaged, and his
cheeks were paler than usual.
He laid in abundantly yesterday, replied one of
the guards, and you see he has a store-chest large
enough to contain provisions for a week.
He is of the kine breed, I suppose, and is chewing
the cud.
It must be the cud of reflection, then, replied the
other, and I have never seen the man who grew fat
upon that food.
This sally was accompanied by a roar of
approbation
.
Mauns raised his head at the shout, without
being aware that he was the subject of it, and the
humourist
approached him, elated with his sally, which
he repeated.
How is it, friend, are you chewing the cud of
reflection
?
Anan! ejaculated Mauns, and the question was
again repeated.
No, replied the sergeant, gravely; I am
chewing
a quid of tobacco.
Both cheeks were distended with the staple of
Virginia
,
and his grinders were actively engaged. Another
roar of laughter followed the reply, but as Mauns saw
nothing to laugh at, he stared in vacant astonishment
at their merriment.
Miriam now crossed the square, and approached the
spot where Talman was standing.
A fair prisoner, this, said Gordon, and better
worth keeping guard over than the ragged rascals we
are watching.
I should like the post, replied another, and
would be willing to lose an eye if she escaped my
vigilance. Which way, my pretty lass?
Can you inform me, gentleman, replied Miriam,
whether there is among the prisoners, an officer by
the name of Jurian Hartfield?
I thought as much, muttered Gordon, who
overheard
the question.
What kind of an officer is he, my pretty girl?
demanded
the soldier.
A lieutenant, I believe, sir.
That is no guide, for they all seem to be either
lieutenants or captains, and it requires sharp eyes to
discover a staff officer from a private, for they are all
ragged alike.
And brave alike too, sir, replied Miriam.
Well said, my little rebel. But what sort of a
looking man is this you are in search ofold or
young?
He is young, sir.
That I might have sworn to. Go on with your
description.
He is light of frame, sir, with curly black hair, and
a countenance dark and serious.
And handsome, too?
Some have pronounced him handsome, replied
Miriam, her eyes cast down.
And you do not find fault with their opinion?
I see no reason why I should.
A lover, on my life!
O! no, sir, not a lover, replied Miriam, and her
pale cheeks coloured. He is but a friendnothing
more than a friend.
A happy dog in having such friends, replied the
soldier, smiling.
Can you direct me to him?
There is no one here answering to your
description
,
replied the soldier.
Then I must seek farther, said Miriam, and was
about to depart.
Before I permit you to go, I must have the pass
word, said Gordon, approaching her.
The pass word, Mr. Jones, I know it not, replied
Miriam, trembling as she spoke.
Then you must remain my prisoner, or suffer me
to whisper it in your ear, he replied, taking hold of
her familiarly.
Your prisoner! I do not understand you.
I will soon make myself understood, continued
Gordon. I never met with one so ignorant at your
age. You have a tempting eye, faith, and a pair of
lips that would make a saint turn sinner.
This rudeness to an unprotected female!
Call you it rudeness? I shall be as polite as it is
in the nature of man to be, I promise you. He
attempted
to kiss her, and a struggle ensued. The
soldiers
looked on, and smiled at the contest.
Are you ruffianswill you patiently witness such
an outrage!
Where's the use of being so coy with me,
Miriam
?
The soldiers, so far from interfering, only laughed.
Truly may we say, in the words of the author of the
Merry Beggars; `Are not all things, any thing, every
thing, to be laughed at? And if nothing were to be
seen, felt, heard, or understood, we would laugh at it
too!'
Save me from this ruffian, if you have the feelings
of men, cried the affrighted Miriam.
Sergeant Talman, who had been long contemplating
the huge clock built by the side of the State House,
was roused by her appeal, and now for the first time
noticed the struggle. He recognised Miriam, and
leisurely stalking to the spot, for the sergeant moved
as systematically as a timepiece, he dragged the rude
assailant from the trembling girl, and the next instant
planted a fist, resembling a sledge hammer, between
his eyebrows. Gordon fell, and a cry arose among the
soldieryKnock the damned rebel down; Pin
him to the earth.
Half a dozen bayonets were immediately presented
towards the sergeant, and Miriam clung to him to
protect
him from his danger. Oaths and epithets were
dealt out liberally, and the prisoners crowded around
to protect Mauns. All was confusion; the only one
who appeared perfectly calm, was the phlegmatic
sergeant
himself.
Make way with your bayonetsdown with the
rebels! exclaimed several voices at the same time.
They pressed upon the crowd, in the centre of which
stood the sergeant, his tall lank figure towering above
the rest, and Miriam still clinging to him. Three or
four officers passed through the avenue of the State
House, and entered the square during the excitement.
Down with himstab him in her arms, continued
the infuriated guards.
What is the meaning of this confusion?
demanded
one of the officers. He was youthful, graceful in
his person, and possessed of a handsome and manly
countenance.
A rebel has dared to strike one of the guards.
And a dozen of you have espoused his quarrel,
replied the officer. Bravely done! Was he not able
to take his own part, that you are all up in arms?
You would not have us stand by, major, and see a
comrade trampled on? muttered one of the guards.
No, replied Andre, for it was he, nor would I
have you stand by and see an enemy trampled on.
What is the cause of this disturbance?
He but took a harmless liberty with that young
woman, sir, and the prisoner interfered, replied the
soldier.
To protect a female from insult; was it not so?
Why, sir, I must say, the young woman did not
seem altogether willing, muttered the soldier.
Then you have reason to blush at having taken
part against her protector, and the ruffian may rejoice
at escaping with a punishment so light. He moved
towards the sergeant, and the crowd gave way. I
admire your spirit, he continued, addressing Talman,
and no prisoner shall receive insult or injury in my
presence for asserting the feelings that become a man.
You have done well.
I thank you, major, replied Mauns, but master
Jones does not appear to think so. The refugee, who
was known to Mauns only by his fictitious name, got
up and stood by sullenly and silent. Now, as he is
not satisfied, I am ready to box him for a shilling, if
you will only stand by and see fair play. Andre
smiled at the proposition.
That's reverting to first principles, exclaimed
M`Druid, who had entered with the officers, and is
a much prettier way of settling trifling disputes than
any of your modern improvements. It's the way we
have in my own native isle.
Andre turned to Gordon, and said
I am astonished that this disturbance should have
originated in one who has so much reason to cultivate
a good understanding with his countrymen.
I am not to blame, sir, replied Gordon. The
liberty I took was perhaps warranted by my intimacy
with the young woman.
The clock struck six, and Mauns counted every
stroke on the bell, during which his attention was again
riveted upon the huge structure.
It is time that the prisoners retire, said major
Andre to the sergeant of the guard. Conduct them
to the place of locking up.
This command was followed by a few strokes on a
drum, and the prisoners repaired from different parts of
the square to the centre building. They entered the
avenue of the State House, and the doors were closed
after them. Mauns Talman, as he slowly retired,
endeavoured
to comfort and encourage the still agitated
Miriam, and at the same time he cast a lingering look
at the clock, whose mechanism he had been so intently
studying ever since he entered the yard. Gordon
approached
Miriam, and attempted to soothe her feelings.
Away, your sight is hateful to me.
Dear Miriam, I did not mean to offend you, he
replied. The intimacy between us should rather
create confidence than fear, then why is it that you are
always thus agitated when I am in your presence?
Leave me; you are as the glossy serpent to my
sight.
Miriam, have I deserved this!
No moreno more!
Hear me but speak.
My heaviest curse would be removed, were I
never
to hear that voice again.
Well would it be for thee, perverse girl, if there
were no heavier curse upon thee than passes my lips.
His countenanee indicated that he meant more than
his words conveyed.
What greater curse is there on earth than the
presence
of one we hate? demanded the agitated girl, in
a voice scarcely articulate.
Sometimes the presence of one we love, replied
Gordon, in a cold tone, while a malicious smile curled
his lips. Even such have proved a greater curse, to
such as thee, than the worst enemy.
To such as me!
Your secret's known, replied Gordon, in a tone
that fell like a bolt of ice upon the heart of Miriam.
O, heavens! she sighed, and hiding her face in
her hands, her whole frame trembled.
Your secret's known, but confide in me, and your
confidence shall not be betrayed as it has been. She
sobbed aloud, and Gordon continuedYou have
fallen into the hands of a villain, and have therefore
reason to distrust all mankind, but dear Miriam, look
upon me with kinder feelings, and it shall be the study
of my life to heal the heart that has been so wantonly
wounded.
Leave meleave meI would be alone.
I cannot leave you, friendless as you are, and
deserted
by the world. My heart sicknes to think what
your fate may be without a protector.
I look for none on earth.
Exposed to the scoffs of all, and broken down in
spirit, you must sink before the obstacles you have to
encounter. A friend offers to comfort and protect, and
yet you turn from him with as much horror as if he had
pulled down this ruin upon you. Is this justice, either
to me or to yourself! Think more kindly of me,
Miriam
,
and all may yet be well.
Is there no one to save me from this man!
exclaimed
the heart-broken girl, and burst into an agony
of tears. The officers, who, during the foregoing, had
stood conversing at a short distance, were attracted
by her voice, and approached. Miriam recognised
M`Druid, having seen him at Mr. Morton's house, on
the night of the capture of Jurian, and she hastened to
him. Yes, you are kind, she cried, you, you will
save me.
Be comforted, poor trembler, replied M`Druid.
No harm shall come near you. What is it you
fear?
That mantake me away from that man. She
shuddered, as she pointed towards Gordon with
averted
eyes, and M`Druid desired him to withdraw. He
obeyed, and sullenly ascended the steps of the
building
,
where he remained, looking at the group.
Whither shall I conduct you? demanded M`Druid
of Miriam.
VOL. II.2
I came in search of one to whom you can best
direct
me, but I know not whether it is proper that we
should meet again.
Who is it you would see?
Lieutenant Hartfield. She blushed, and held
down her head as his name passed her lips. He is
in prisonno friends near him, and possibly I may
serve him. It is a sad thing to be in prison, without
friends.
If you desire it, I will conduct you to him,
replied
M`Druid.
I know not whether I oughtand yet I have not
the fortitude to say, I will not see him.
Lean on my arm; it is but to cross the square,
and your search will be at an end.
I accept your kindnessyou are unlike most
men.
Not much, my darling; but my heart and hand
are always at the service of a weeping woman.
They walked towards the prison, and the officers
followed, while Gordon from the steps stood gazing
after them. As they crossed the square, Andre
demanded
of one of the officers
Delancey, how long is it since you left the
barracks
in the north?
Scarcely an hour, replied Delancey.
Are the yagers prepared for the attack on Red
Bank to-morrow?
All will be in readiness at the hour appointed for
crossing the river.
Does Donop appear sanguine of success?
When did he ever appear otherwise? He is a
rough soldier, and partakes more of the boor than the
gentleman.
It cannot be denied, that he is better adapted to a
darker age than the present, and his followers would
have made themselves conspicuous among the
Vandals
or the Cimbri.
It is proper that they are chosen for this attack,
for as the rascals wo'n't fight without pay, they should
be compelled to earn their wages.
They are in the right, replied Andre, smiling,
and have classical authority for becoming
mercenaries
.
Even the gods Neptune and Apollo trounced
Laomedon for cheating them of their hire.
They crossed the square, and when they came in
front of the prison, an officer of rank was ascending
the steps; they bowed to him, and he entered the jail.
M`Druid followed him, with Miriam trembling by his
side, and having succeeded in getting her past the
guard, he made her wishes known to one of the
attendants
,
and returned to his companions, when they
pursued their way down the street.
Gordon was still standing on the steps of the State
House, ruminating on the result of his interview with
Miriam. He felt that her dislike to him was inveterate,
and that there was not the remotest probability of her
sentiments undergoing a change. This conviction
created
a corresponding feeling in his own mind, and
eradicated
the slight degree of tenderness that he had
entertained for her, though the personal charms of the
poor girl still maintained their influence. His hatred
for Jurian was also inflamed by the knowledge of the
impossibility of weaning her affections from him.
The crowd in the yard had now disappeared, save
here and there a few straggling soldiers, who were
released from duty for the night. Alice Grey
entered
,
and approached the door where Gordon was
standing. She walked as one who had been stricken
by sorrow, with her tall form bent, and her head
hanging
down. She was dressed in a long gray cloak, and
her face was concealed by the hood. As she drew
nigh to the spot where Gordon stood, sullenly, leaning
against one of the pillars of the door, she paused, and
throwing the hood from her face, accosted him
Am I too late to see one of the prisoners?
The doors are closed for the night, and no one
may pass the guard at this hour.
I feared as much. Can you tell me how he is?
Is his wound better? This is a sad place for an invalid
to be confined in.
Who do you mean, good mother?
Who should I mean, but Corwinthat much
wronged and wretched man?
He is no longer here.
Not here! Where is he, then?
That I know not. Major Andre, on visiting the
prisoners this morning, perceiving the condition of his
mind, out of compassion, procured an order for his
release
,
and he is now at large.
God reward him! ejaculated Alice.
Compassion
towards the afflicted will smoothe his way to
heaven.
Very likely, replied Paul.
If you know nothing further of Corwin, there is
another, of whom you can give me some tidings. I
have heard of her being at 'squire Morton's, but she is
no longer there. Where have you placed your victim?
Where is my lost child, Miriam?
No victim of mine, mother Alice; she is as
innocent
as the lamb unborn for me.
Have you not betrayed her? Broken her heart
and mine, and yet pronounce her innocent!
Is it in nature to betray the being that we love? I
know not how this slander has reached your ear, but
in defiance of calumny I pronounce myself guiltless of
the charge; but there is another, you little dream of,
who will not be able to vindicate himself as easily.
Another! what other? demanded Alice, in a
faltering
voice.
Jurian Hartfield.
That boy, who has been as dear to me as a son,
and yet I knew not why my heart yearned towards
himto sting the bosom to death that cherished him!
Impossible! It cannot be!
The adder is sometimes concealed beneath a
flower, replied Gordon, his stern features relaxing
into something like a smile. Virtue is but a mask,
that even villains may assume upon occasion, to
betray.
You wrong him; it cannot be!
I will swear it is as true as holy writ, and call upon
Miriam herself to attest to the truth of what I assert.
So confident! Gracious heavens! if I have been
deceived in that boy, I will abjure my speciesthere
is nothing like virtue in the world!
There is a great deal like virtue, mother Alice,
but very little of the thing itself; but as times go, the
counterfeit passes currently for sterling coin.
What proof have you of the truth of what you
assert?
She was here but a few minutes ago in search of
him, and even now is within the walls of that prison,
where he is confined. I saw her ascend the steps as
you entered the yard.
My poor misguided child! Could we but meet
again, I might reclaim her from her error, and save
her from the fearful destiny that awaits her!
None stray so widely, mother, replied Gordon,
gravely, but that the right path is still open before
them.
Few return, who have strayed as she has,
replied
Alice; still will I hope she may be awakened
to a sense of her error, and that her afterlife will cancel
the remembrance of her present shame.
Is that in the nature of man?
I know not what I say! My own experience
should have taught me that shame is a never-dying
fire, upon which fresh fuel is daily cast, and when it
has burnt down to the very embers, it rekindles among
the ashes of the dead. It is a merciless world we live
2*
in, and even the most sinful are ever ready to cast the
first stone at the sinner.
A merciless world, and a blind one too, good
mother
,
replied Gordon, or you would not have
attempted
the life of your sincerest friend.
I did you wrong, and I repent of it, replied the
humbled Alice, but I was born to err.
To return good for evil, continued Gordon, is
a line of conduct that is attended with its own reward,
and I wish to adopt it towards you. Miriam is fallen,
and yet I cannot cease to love her devotedly. So far
from it, her affliction has increased my tenderness, and
in order to alleviate it, I am willing that her shame
should fall on me.
How fall on you?
Let her become my wife. The knowledge of the
author of her wrong rests in our own bosoms, and the
shaft of slander will not be thrown at the wife of the
humble Jones. Thus will she be saved from an
appalling
fate, and one who loves her be rendered
happy.
But her affections are devoted to another.
And that other has betrayed her. A sense of duty
will teach her to forget one so unworthy, and when
this fatal infatuation is broken, gratitude will induce
her to yield her heart to him who stepped in between
her and ruin.
I will think of it, replied Alice, in a low voice.
Do so, and remember I live but for Miriam.
He descended from the steps, and they walked
slowly and in silence across the square, towards the
prison, together. Gordon was one of those who
entertain
the ideas of Solomon and David with regard to
matrimony.
CHAPTER II.
'Tis better to suffer treason, than act the traitor.
Rollo
.
Go seek the happier maiden, who lur'd thy love from me;
My heart with sorrow laden, is no more priz'd by thee:
Repeat the vows you made me, say, swear thy love is true;
Thy faithless vows betray'd methey may betray her too.
But, no! may she ne'er languish, like me in shame and wo;
Ne'er feel the throbbing anguish that I am doom'd to know!
Leggett
.
The
night that Jurian was apprehended he was
conducted
to the Walnut street prison, where he had
leisure
to reflect upon the misery he had entailed upon
himself by his headlong passion. He felt that his
motives
in visiting the city, while invested by the enemy,
were liable to be misconstrued, and he was fully
conscious
of the odium he had entailed upon his name by
following the dictates of his feelings. He had betrayed
the confiding Miriam, and increased the sorrows of her
afflicted mother; forfeited the esteem of her he loved
most, and totally destroyed his hopes of ever obtaining
her hand. He had become the companion of a common
robber and a spy; had been his dupe, and was now at
his mercy, for he had sold himself to the enemy of his
country at a time when she most required his services,
and if betrayed, he must become a fugitive from the
land of his birth.
Such were his reflections on the evening to which
we have brought our narrative, and he was pacing his
prison, meditating on the darkness of the picture, when
the chain of thought was broken by the entrance of the
keeper of the prison, accompanied by an officer, whom
Jurian recognised to be the same that presided at the
council-board on the night he had entered the city.
The jailor withdrew and left them alone.
I regret, Mr. Hartfield, said the officer, that
you have experienced such harsh treatment among us.
To-day, for the first time, it reached my ears, and I
have hastened to tender any amends that may be
within
my power.
Your lordship is considerate, replied Jurian, but
you need not feel concerned at a circumstance that I
have reason to rejoice at. I view my imprisonment as
the most fortunate event that could have occurred.
How fortunate?
It has afforded me time for reflection, and calmly
to weigh the magnitude of the folly I have committed.
I have done so, and tremble as I contemplate the abyss
of degradation from which I have escaped.
You speak in riddles.
And yet my words are plain. My lord, I am not
suited to the office you have imposed upon me; and as
my crime has thus far been confined to thought only,
injuring no one but myself, I am resolved that it shall
never assume a more hateful aspect by being put in
execution.
Am I to understand that you are false to the faith
we have reposed in you?
Rather ask, whether I am true to my struggling
country, and I will answer.
And what is your answer?
That I would rather lay down my life this instant,
than place the slightest obstacle in her pathway to
freedom.
So patriotic! Reflect, sir, you have gone too far
to recede.
Perhaps so. The step I have taken cannot be
recalled
,
but I have not gone too far to stand still, and I
prefer that position to the one you would persuade me
to assume.
Are you aware of its danger? You reject our
friendship, and break your faith the same moment it is
plighted. Under these circumstances, can you hope
that what has passed between us will long remain
concealed
?
and if you return to the rebel ranks, daily
dread of exposure will render your life miserable.
Not more so, replied Jurian, than daily to
mingle
with my countrymen, converse with them, feed with
them, and sleep in their tents for the base purpose of
betraying.
And to escape from that position you are ready to
become a double traitor; false to them and to us also.
This bat-like policy is the most despicable that can be
adopted.
You have made me a traitor, and are astonished at
the workmanship of your own hands.
I am indeed astonished. You are an apt scholar,
and are fit to take your degrees after a single lesson.
The praise is due to my preceptor, replied
Jurian
,
sarcastically; under different tuition, I might
have been a long time in acquiring the proficiency I
have already attained. In my turn permit me to offer
a precept, which may be of service to you in future.
I am all attention to so admirable a sophist.
Never place confidence in the man whose soul is
black enough to betray his country, for whenever he
finds it his interest, he will deceive both man and God
without compunction.
And this sage corollary you draw from your own
conduct?
No, sir, my conduct has been the reverse, for I
refuse to become the abhorred wretch that you would
make me; and though you may regret the failure of
your attempt, you cannot condemn the sentiments that
have led to its failure. You are aware of the arts
employed
to entrap me; I acted from the impulse of the
moment, and became the victim of my own feelings,
but happily I have had time to reflect before I had
gone too far, and while I labour to regain self-esteem,
my contempt is increased for those who so basely
conspired
against me.
I have said your reward shall be munificent.
What is the wealth of the Indies to the slave who
has sold his life, conscience, and every earthly hope
for gold? I have received one bribe already, and my
only consolation is that I was not polluted by
appropriating
it to my own use. It merely passed through
my hands to those of your instrumentthe base
contriver
of the plot against me. Still its stain is upon me,
and I shall not rest until the amount is restored to its
original owner, for until that is done we cannot meet
on equal terms.
Inexplicable man, I neither ask nor expect you to
return the money. It is yours.
No, sir, it is not mine, nor shall it be. I am
unwilling
to compromise my standing with any man. We
all are equal, and he is a fool, who, Esau-like, sells his
birthright for a mess of pottage. Suffer me to go at
liberty, and the money shall be immediately returned.
That I cannot do. You are either our friend, or
our prisoner.
Prisoner be it then, replied Jurian, for that, in
the worst condition, is a better title than that of traitor
in the best.
How can the name of traitor attach itself to a man
for an act by which he evinces his loyalty to his
king?
But when that king is not recognised, and his
sovereignty
is looked upon as a presumptuous claim,
which neither the laws of nature nor man
acknowledge
how
then? Passion, sir, may at times lead me
astray in spite of reason, but sophistry never on a
subject
so plain. My mind is made up, and is not to be
changed by the erroneous views of others.
You then consider the rebellion of the colonies as
justifiable resistance?
That, sir, is a weak phrase, and scarcely embraces
my view of the subject.
What stronger language would you employ?
I should pronounce it tyrannical invasion on the
part of the British, for what can be more preposterous
than the claim of a small island, so far removed, to an
extensive continent in a different quarter of the globe?
The pretension is too absurd to be recognised for a
moment, for the laws of both nature and man declare
against it, and I should rather suppose the arrogant
isle itself was originally designed for a province, and
not for the lawless usurper over both land and sea,
that she has become. But this is not the only instance
in which the order of nature has been perverted by the
visionary notions of man.
In the intercourse between nations there is but
one rule which has been reduced to a homely
proverb
`might
makes right,' and as this war must
terminate
in the reduction of the colonies to their former
allegiance, it is useless to argue on the validity of your
pretension to become an independent nation. The
thing in itself is too chimerical, and the only hope that
remains is for them to acknowledge the errors of their
ways, before they have strayed too far from the path
to return. The door may not long remain open.
Still the stale prejudices of the old world! As to
closing the door, we wish it closed, for it would be
better for us to be shut out from you forever; and in
return for the friendly advice you have given, I will
presume to offer mine. Do not smile when I tell you
to embark for Europe without delaybefore your
shipping
crumbles to ashes on our coast, and the blood of
your armies fattens the soil they have pillaged and
attempted to render desolate.
Pardon me, sir, I must smile, even while I admire
your ardour.
Then, sir, you will smile on when I predict that
the time must come when this nation will give a tone to
all Europe. It is idle to judge of the effect of this
revolution
from the result of those in the old world.
Governments have been overthrown, one system has
succeeded another, and the people remained the same
moral agents, having effected nothing more than a
mere change of masters. And this is readily accounted
forthey received their tone from the nations by
which they were surrounded, and it required too
powerful
a struggle for the mind wholly to disengage itself
from its chains. With us it is different; we are
removed
from this influence, and are at liberty to think
for ourselvesand what is the consequence? A spirit
is already abroad that no earthly power can suppress
you may check it for a time, but it must continue its
progress, and will not rest until the mind becomes
regenerate
,
and freed from the mouldy and bigoted
opinions
that have been blindly handed down from father
to son, for ages. When such a revolution begins, there
is no foreseeing where it will end, for even sceptres
and crowns must crumble before it.
I deplore this misdirected zeal, for it is worthier of
a better cause. I will take my leave, for while your
mind is engrossed with these visionary notions, it is in
vain for me to endeavour to reclaim you to a course
that might tend to your elevation.
By the neck, I presume you mean, my lord,
replied
Jurian, smiling.
Reflect on what I have said, continued the
officer
,
and when next we meet, I trust our opinions
will not be so widely at variance. Farewell sir.
Jurian bowed, and the officer withdrew; and a few
moments afterwards the jailor again appeared
conducting
Miriam, who, pale and still trembling from the
fright she had undergone, stood beside Jurian in
silence
,
the same passive and devoted creature she had
ever been.
This is kind and unlooked for, Miriam, he said,
as the jailor withdrew.
I came to see whether I can be of any service to
you, she meekly replied, for as you are deprived of
your liberty, even I may be of service.
I wished for a friend, and you have come
opportunely
.
You have doubtless, ere this, heard of the
disgrace that I have brought upon myself.
I have not, nor do I desire to hear it, even from
your lips. I have been so long accustomed to hear
nothing but praise connected with your name, that I
should now doubt my senses to hear disgrace attached
to it.
And yet, sooner or later you must hear it.
But not now. Let that unwelcome tale be put off
as long as possible, for it will reach me soon enough
without your aid. You say I have come opportunely;
what would you have me do?
Can you find some one to bear a message from
me to captain Swain or surgeon M`Crea?
I can do it myself, and then I shall be certain that
your messenger is faithful.
You, Miriam! You are not aware of what you
will have to encounter on your way to the army. The
season is far advanced, a lawless soldiery are prowling
in all directions, and an unprotected female to be
exposed
to insult and danger on my account! Miriam,
I cannot think of it.
I have no fears, if I can serve you.
Find some other who will undertake it.
I maypossibly I may. What message would
you have delivered?
Tell them I am not ungrateful for the many
services
they have already rendered me. Tell them, this
favour may be the last I shall ever tax their friendship
with, and that it is to redeem my honour that I again
VOL II.3
appeal to them. I blush to call upon their generosity
again, but imprisoned as I am, I have no other
resource
.
How can they aid you?
By loaning me what money they can conveniently
command. My honour, perhaps my life, is in pledge;
to redeem that I call upon them, though the bauble is
scarcely worth redeeming.
On such a mission, Jurian, I could wish that the
wings of the swallow were mine, for my speed will
never keep pace with my impatience.
How can I ever repay you for the interest you
still feel in one so unworthy! one who has done you
irreparable wrong.
Suffer those thoughts to rest while they may, she
replied. I have never blamed you, Jurian, nor do I.
The fault was in the weakness of my own heart, and
on it, alone, must the crime and the shame fall. I did
not err from ignorance of the consequences attendant
upon guilt, for they were daily before my eyes in their
most distressing forma mother's incurable anguish!
and yet I had not the virtue to turn from sin. I
beheld
how her mind had been prostrated, and knew
there was but one course that could have wrought so
complete a ruin in a mind like her'sat times I
trembled
to behold the fearful workings of her remorse, and
with this lesson, daily before me, I have pulled down
ruin on myself. I am to blame, and I only.
Have you seen your mother since you left your
home?
Not yet, and may heaven spare me the anguish of
that meeting, for there is nothing on earth I dread
more. I cannot support the idea of being humbled in
her sight, for such was her blind partiality, that she
thought me incapable of error; and now to appear
before
her, fallen and degraded!Kind heaven! spare
me that pangI shall never be able to bear the glance
of her eye again.
She was never harsh to you?
All kindness and love! It is that, it is that!
Had she not been the best of mothersdid I expect
to hear reproaches, I might bear all. But she will be
as kind as everI know she will, though I have broken
her heart. O! my poor mother!
Return to her, Miriam, return.
I cannot. I have more than once resolved to do
so, but my soul sunk at the thought, and my courage
failed. It is impossible, Jurian. Dear as she is to me,
I shall never venture to see her more. Duplicity
towards
her, at a time when she thought me devoid of
guile, was insupportable, and drove me from her sight,
then how shall I stand in her presence, overwhelmed
with shame! I cannot, I cannot!
Tears trickled down her pale cheeks, but there were
no violent signs of emotion, for the channel had been
so long open that they flowed freely from her wounded
heart, without even a sob or a sigh.
Is Gordon acquainted with your feelings?
demanded
Jurian.
Gordon! who is he? I know no one of that
name.
Poor girl! you know not then half the extent of
his villany. I mean Jones; is he acquainted with your
sufferings?
I fear he is, for this evening I met him, and he
appeared familiar with circumstances that I thought
hidden from the world. But why do you single him
out for such a question? A man from whom my soul
recoils in horror.
Is there no reason that he should be singled out,
Miriam?
None, unless it is because I fear him more than
all mankind.
And wherefore do you fear him? Should not his
presence rather create confidence than fear?
Confidence! There is a meaning in your words I
cannot comprehend. He is acquainted with my shame,
but how it came to his knowledge, I know not. You
could not have betrayed me to such a wretch, and yet
he knows it. Speak, Jurian, what covert meaning is
there in your words?
Should he not know it, Miriam?
You torture me. Explain.
Have you not deceived me in relation to that man;
and notwithstanding your affected dislike, is he not
even now in the full possession of your heart?
O, Jurian! have I lived to be doubted by you!
I have his word for it.
His word! what weight should be attached to the
word of one so unprincipled?
But there is other evidence that carries full
conviction
upon the face of it; evidence than cannot lie.
This is cruel! replied Miriam, and burst into
tears. If you seek for an excuse to cast me from
you, it is useless to resort to such means, for I shall
not trouble you. Be happy where you may, I shall
never bring a pang to your heart, or a cloud to your
brow. Farewell.
Stay one moment, and answer me, have you not
written to him?
Never; and there is nothing could have called
forth so acute a sense of my shame as such a
question
.
Then how did he become possessed of a letter
from you, Miriam?
A letter from me! I have already said I never
wrote to him; then why trample on me to make me
feel that I am as a worm beneath your feet?
Reflect, Miriam, reflect.
The poor girl struggled for a moment with her
feelings
,
and then calmly replied
Farewell, Jurian. I perceive that I have lost your
confidence, it is therefore time that we part, and I
would to heaven that this interview had never taken
place. Farewell.
Before you go, answer me. Is there any means
by which he could have obtained such a letter without
your knowledge?
I know nothe may have forged it.
This was no forgery; I knew the characters too
well.
Miriam's agitation increased, and it was some time
before she recovered herself sufficiently to make a
reply.
I recollect nowa few weeks ago I handed him a
letter to deliver to you.
To me!
I had not seen you for several days, and my
anxiety became insupportable; I wrote to you, and
sent the letter by Jones, who told me that he would
see you in the city. He may possibly have kept it.
He did, he did! Fool that I have been to be
duped by so shallow an artifice!
This then accounts for his knowledge of what I
hoped was concealed, and I have published my own
shame.
Unprincipled villain! Justice shall yet overtake
him, and I trust I may be the instrument she will
employ
.
Miriam, you have relieved my mind from a
painful burden.
And you have cast an additional weight on mine,
for I supposed I should still possess your confidence,
though all the world distrusted me. But even that last
delusion is at length broken.
Thou deeply injured and betrayed one, I am
sensible
of the enormity of my conduct towards you, and
abhor myself for having so long delayed to do you
justice
.
But from this hour I cast off all other
considerations
,
and as I hope to prosper, it shall be done.
Justiceis that in the power of a human being?
3*
Is there any act can restore me, even to the humble
state from which I fell? There is none.
The calm countenance, steady eye, and low
unfaltering
voice in which she spoke, denoted that there
was no hope remaining.
Are you not my wife, by the divine law, as firmly
so as any human institution could render you? It is
written, that `thou shalt be my wife, because I have
humbled thee, and I may not put thee away all my
days.' The obligation is positive, it is the divine
command
,
and no human law can weaken its force.
Still the decree is no longer recognised, and it is
hard to believe conduct innocent in the sight of heaven,
which man, with one consent, has stigmatised as
criminal
.
It is not in the power of men to invent sins,
Miriam
,
and then charge them upon the consciences of
their fellow mortals to their condemnation before
God.
Few minds can sustain themselves against the
opinions of the world, however fortified by a
consciousness
of right.
And what is the opinion of the world! As well
might we make the chamelion the standard of colour
as human opinion the standard of truth, for it varies in
every age and every section of country. The Hindu
widow goes to heaven by mounting the funeral pyre
of her husband, while the christian is condemned to
everlasting punishment by committing suicide. And
this is human opinion. Still, Miriam, the world is
before
us, and if our happiness is destroyed in one part,
we can fly to another in search of it.
But shall we find it there, unless we carry it with
us?
We shall be together, and while that is the case,
Miriam, can we be otherwise than happy?
That rests with you, Jurian. The time may come
when the thought will occur, that for me you sacrificed
all, and then you will weigh how very little I have
brought you in return.
Never, Miriam, never.
A stranger in a strange land, without friends and
destitute of the means of support, your present
thoughts must give place to others of a less generous
nature.
Fear not that, Miriam; he is but a fool who
starves with the wide world before him.
And yet many starve with the world before them.
But I am not that fool. While I live I will have
my share of the benefits that nature has bestowed in
common upon all, and when I die, I will venture to say
I shall take as much out of the world as the wealthiest.
Since I know not my parentage, I shall be true to my
mother Nature, who will ever find me her own child.
Visionary man!
And what is the world but a vision, crowded with
ideal beings whose real characters are never
ascertained
from the time of entering upon the scene until they
pass away. Many a coward is looked upon as a hero,
dressed in his laced coat and feathers: hypocrites as
saints beneath their long robes, and fools in purple and
gewgaw crowns, as demi-gods, until death strips them
of their masquerading dress, and the poor players
mingle
in the tiring room upon a par together. The world
at large is indeed but the archetype of the stage, where
he who seizes upon the most prominent character,
figures to the greatest advantage, and has the merriest
time of it, until the curtain falls.
And why are you ambitious of joining in a farce
like this?
Because the player is the only one who profits by
it, while the mere spectator is cheated of his time and
money. Yes, Miriam, I shall join in it for your sake,
and the character I shall assume shall not be a
subordinate
one I promise you. I doubt not that I shall
acquit
myself with applause, stimulated by your presence,
and again I shall see that pallid cheek glow, and that
dim eye sparkle with delight, your mind throw off the
cloud that now envelopes it, and my Miriam become
the same bright being that nature had formed before
the blight of the world had tarnished the exquisite
workmanship.
Enthusiast!
There is much still in store for us. The stormy
night may be succeeded by a cloudless day, and even
the most desolate winter must give place to a blooming
and joyous spring. Look forward, Miriam, it shall not
be always winter with us, for our hearts shall peep
forth as smilingly as the spring flowers when the snow
wastes away, and their songs shall be as cheerful as
those of the bluebird as he plumes himself in the
vernal
breeze. Look forward, Miriam; the birds, the
trees, the brooks, the earth, the air, all nature teaches
us to look forward, then do not close your mind against
the inspiring lesson, for spring must return.
The picture you have drawn is a bright one,
Jurian
,
but unhappily there is one figure you have
omitted
.
Agatha, where is she?
That name, dear as it is to me, awakens the
recollection
of feelings that never can be revived. I can
hear it now calmly, and while I repeat it, my pulse
beats as temperately as ever.
Still the spell is not broken.
She herself has broken it, and pointed out the path
I must pursue. Her innocent bosom would recoil from
one stained with perfidy towards her own sex. My
thoughts are changedthe hopes that led me to forget
what is due to you have vanished, and I blush that
they ever found entrance in my bosom. But they are
goneand henceforth I shall study how to heal the
heart that I have so mercilessly wounded.
Still the spell is not broken, for she is as dear to
you as ever.
She can never be otherwise than dear to me, but
my feelings may change.
And why should they change? She is as unspotted
and lovely and innocent as ever. Your hearts have
been intertwined from infancy, and her love is still as
holy as in the days of childhood. Then why talk of
change? No earthly power can weaken the ties
between
you. You may be sunk in poverty; steeped to
the very lips in guilt, and she will love you still. Such
is woman's love, while man can calmly talk of
transferring
his fickle heart from such a being.
Miriam, hear me.
Deal with my heart as you please, Jurian, for it is
but a toy that you received as it were but yesterday.
But do not talk of crushing feelings for my sake that
you have nurtured for years, and watched over from
the germ to the very hour of fruitiondo not permit
me to believe you capable of such an effort, lest I too
should learn to change.
Noble-minded girl.
And why this sacrifice of two heartsto heal a
wound that knows no cure? You may remember,
Jurian, the favourite hyacinth that grew in our little
garden last spring.
I do; the stem was broken by the storm.
You may also remember that we propped it with
care, and used every art to restore it, and still the
flower withered and died.
Miriam, what mean you?
That I shall never hold up my head again in this
world. Sustain me as you may, I shall droop as did
that flower, upon which you tried your skill and failed;
it is useless to try it again. Her voice was low and
unfaltering, and her dark eye steady and mild. She
continued, It is time that we separate. Farewell!
Your mission shall be fulfilled.
Miriam do not leave me thus; your voice freezes
my very soul. And can we part with nothing more
than a cold farewell?
And how should we part?
O, Miriam! and cannot your heart direct you?
It is a lesson that it has not yet acquired, and one
that it did hope it would never be obliged to learn.
Farewell!
No more than that!
Again, farewell!
She slowly withdrew and closed the door after her,
while Jurian stood petrified with astonishment at the
calmness of her manner. She who had so repeatedly
evinced the warmest affection and entire devotion to
him, had parted from him, and perhaps for the last
time, as if he had been a perfect stranger. Was her
heart estranged from him? He knew that could never
be; but passion had had its day, folly came next, and
that in its turn gave place to despair. The most
violent
ebullition of feeling could not have awakened so
keen a sense of remorse, as did the calm and collected
manner of the heart-broken girl.
Many minutes had not elapsed before a shriek was
heard in the street in front of the prison. Jurian
recognised
the voice of Miriam, and on looking through
the grated window, he beheld her in the presence of
Gordon and her mother, who had awaited her coming
forth. She struggled to escape, but the attempt was
fruitless, and in a few moments they moved off
together
.
CHAPTER III.
Bear him
By word of mouth a single challenge from me,
That, man to man, if he have honour in him,
We may decide all difference.
Chances
.
Jurian
was still looking out of the window after
Miriam, when the jailer again appeared at the door,
accompanied by a man enveloped in a tartan plaid.
This is the gentleman you inquire for, said the
jailer, pointing at Jurian.
Leave us, replied the other, I desire to be
alone with him for a few moments. The jailer
withdrew
,
and the stranger approached the window where
Jurian stood. I presume, sir, you can divine the
purport of this visit?
I am not blest with the gift of divination, replied
Jurian, but perhaps I might read your thoughts, had
I a better view of your person.
Am I so soon forgotten? said the other, throwing
off his cloak.
Colonel Lindsay! You are not forgotten, and I
presume I am remembered too.
Right, sir, replied the earl, biting his lipsand
what do you augur from this visit?
Neither good nor harm. Good I have no reason
to expect, nor injury as long as I remain a prisoner.
True; until we can meet on equal terms, it is my
duty to suppress every thing like animosity; but the
time is not far distant when we may meet as enemies
should meet.
Your mind, I perceive, is still imbued with your
Highland superstitions, replied Jurian, with a smile.
What superstition, sir? I do not understand you.
You have faith in the number three. Well, there
may possibly be a charm in a third trial that no one but
a Scotchman could discover.
You may discover it, sir.
So confident in the spell! I shall be impatient
until we put its virtue to the test
`Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd
Thrice; and once the hedge-pig whin'd.'
Shall I finish the incantation you have
commenced
?
`Cool it with a baboon's blood,
Then the charm is firm and good.'
Your wit is sharper than your sword, and of the
two, the latter is by far less offensive; so, sir, I should
be pleased to learn when we shall spill the baboon's
blood?
To-morrow at sunrise, if you are prepared.
Impossible! how shall I leave the prison?
Here is that will dissolve the bolts and bars,
replied
the earl, handing Jurian a slip of paper which he
perused.
An order from the commander-in-chief that I shall
be released!
`
Sponte su patuisse fores lapsasque lacertis
,
Sponte su fama est, nullo solvente, catenas
,'
says Ovid, and this is quite as wonderful. To whom
am I indebted for this act of kindness?
At my solicitation general Howe granted it,
replied
the earl.
I shall begin to believe that you deal in magic,
indeed
.
And in return for this favour you expect
That you will meet me as a man.
Your wishes shall be complied with, for it would
be a pity to disappoint you after the pains you have
taken.
Have you a friend among the prisoners, whose
presence you would desire on the occasion? If so,
name him, and I will contrive that he shall accompany
us.
You are generous, and I do not apprehend that
you will take any undue advantage. All I desire is my
own sword.
It shall be returned. Young Morton is your friend,
and it would be a satisfaction to me that somebody
should act as your second.
My friend! a pretty cabalistical word, containing
about as much meaning as the abracadabra of the
Syrians
,
and yet more pregnant with mischief than the
whole vocabulary besides.
You object to him, then?
Not I; he will serve to look on as well as
another
.
Major M`Druid will act on my behalf, and I feel
convinced, from his sense of honour, he will be as
much your friend as mine upon the occasion.
Friend again, and in a different sense! A whole
dictionary might be filled in explaining that little word!
I am perfectly satisfied, sir, with the names you have
mentioned.
What weapons do your prefer?
Not the broadsword, or possibly the charm of
number three might be cut asunder, replied Jurian,
smiling. A slight tinge coloured the cheeks of Balcarras,
and the other continued: Pistols, I presume, will place
us more upon an equality; you can, however, make
your own selection, and give the charm a fair chance.
VOL. II.4
I have no objection to pistols, and as you have not
a case of your own at hand, you can take your choice
of mine.
I accept your offer.
Then to-morrow, at sunrise, continued Balcarras,
I may expect you on Walnut street wharf. We will
cross the river and fight on the opposite shore, that in
case I fall, there will be no danger of your being
overtaken
and carried back to prison.
You are considerate.
Descend with me to the door, and there we part
for the present. They left the room and met the
jailor in the passage, to whom Balcarras handed the
slip of paper, saying, here are your instructions, sir;
this prisoner must be delivered into my custody; I am
colonel Lindsay of the Highlanders.
All is right, said the keeper, and accompanied
them to the gate of the prison which he unlocked, and
they descended the rough granite steps to the street,
where they paused for a moment, and Balcarras
turning
to Jurian, said
We are now equals, sir, and I rejoice at it; but
to-morrow will prove which is the superior.
That I deny. It may possibly decide which is the
better shot, but nothing more.
Well, that is sufficient for me.
The devil it is! I must say you have a vast deal
of curiosity on the subject, to hazard your life to
gratify
it; for my part, I would not give five straws to
settle the question.
This is singular language, from one reputed
brave.
The truth does appear rather singular in these
degenerate
times.
If such are your sentiments, why have you
accepted
the challenge?
Purely out of courtesy to you. Society sometimes
imposes heavy taxes upon those who are willing to pay
them, and this is among the number. I should be
voted a savage, unfit for polished life, if I did not cut
your throat, or permit you to cut mine.
You then reprobate this mode of settling quarrels?
It is one that I would never willingly resort to, and
perhaps shall never have the courage to decline. Still
there are injuries to which we all are liable, and unless
the injured party becomes his own avenger, the offender
will escape with impunity. No man, it is said, should
take the law in his own hands, even though his feelings
may be outraged by a villain, and the law add to their
poignancy by disavowing cognizance of the offence.
This is demanding a vast sacrifice of natural privilege,
and one that many are unwilling to concede. The
social
compact is founded on intellect and refinement of
mind, and in order to secure its duration, it is
necessary
to protect the basis of the institution. Let us not
be told that the law may not enter into the refined
feelings
of the party aggrieved, for to such feelings is
society
indebted for its proudest institutions, and without
them, we should speedily return to a state in which
brute strength would maintain the ascendency. As
long as we are liable to outrages which the law cannot
adequately punish, man will assume the character of
the self-avenger, though laws be enacted for his
punishment
,
and the consequent protection of him who
called forth his vengeance. So, sir, farewell until
to-morrow
,
when we shall discuss the subject with keener
argument.
Farewell, thou inexplicable being.
Balcarras wrapped his cloak more closely around
his form, and bending his head to protect his face from
the keen night wind, directed his steps down the street,
while Jurian followed him slowly, at a distance,
without
having any definite object in view. It was now
about ten o'clock, and the moon shone indistinctly, as
the gathering clouds that were flying rapidly and low,
obscured her brightness. At this period the dock was
open from the Delaware to Walnut street, at which
place a substantial stone bridge was erected. The
creek above the bridge had already been arched over,
and formed a street, as at the present day, while below
it was uncovered, and at flood tide boats ascended the
dock as high as the bridge. As Balcarras approached
this spot, he was accosted by a hoarse and low voice
I have been waiting impatiently for you.
He stopped, and raising his head from the folds of
his cloak, looked around, but beheld no one.
Who was it spoke? demanded Balcarras, but no
answer was returned. He heard footsteps approaching,
and a few moments after he was addressed by another
voice from a different direction.
Why are you standing here alone, colonel, at this
hour? Your mistress is not so deaf to your complaints,
I hope, that you have come forth to tell your sorrows
to the moon? He turned, and beheld M`Druid by
his side, who continuedBy my hilts, you have
chosen a romantic spot, and the very place where your
true lover may finish his business according to
established
rules, for if the fit comes over you, it is but to
leap from the bridge, and you find a watery grave up
to the chin in the mire.
Ah! major, well met; was it you spoke?
By the powers, what a question is that for a man
in his senses! To be sure and it was, my darling. But
where have you been since we parted?
At the prison, in order to effect a meeting with
that upstart, Jurian Hartfield.
And how have you arranged matters?
He is to meet me to-morrow, at sunrise, on the
wharf, and then we shall cross to the opposite shore,
where the career of one of us must close.
That now will be beautiful; the affair could not
have been better managed if I had had a hand in it
myself.
And before it is finished, major, you shall have a
hand in it. But come along; I have a few affairs to
settle, in case of the worst, and time presses.
They crossed the bridge, turned into another street,
and soon disappeared. Immediately after a squalid
figure came from a recess between the buildings, where
he had been concealed during the foregoing dialogue,
and also slowly crossed the bridge; after remaining
on the opposite side a few minutes, as if waiting for
some one, he proceeded down the street towards the
river. He had not advanced many steps before he was
met by a man ascending from the wharf.
You have come at last; I began to fear you had
been discovered.
Corwin, well met.
You have overstaid the hour; what detained you?
I have been endeavouring to find out the best
means of escape, replied Mauns, for it was he, and
have been as far as the headquarters in the north. The
council has just broke up, and from what I can learn,
there is some important movement on foot.
Of what nature?
That I could not ascertain, but from the bustle in
the Hessian quarters, I conclude colonel Donop is to
take an active part.
Have you discovered any way by which we can
regain our freedom? True, I am permitted to wander
at large as a harmless being, and it matters little
whether
I am here or elsewhere; but with you it is
otherwise
.
What can be done?
As I came along the wharves, replied Mauns,
I saw a man mooring a boat at the extremity of this
street, and as the night is dark we may elude the
vigilance
of the sentinels, and escape by this means.
I fear the attempt will be hopeless.
I am certain it is the only sure way. The tide is
high ebb, and I am a Swede and have faith in water.
While they were yet speaking, a man was indistinctly
seen crossing the bridge, and slowly advancing towards
4*
the spot where they were standing. They endeavoured
to conceal themselves beneath the shade of the houses,
but as he drew nigh the sharp eyes of Talman
recognised
Jurian, and he accordingly accosted him by
name.
Who calls me?
A friend, replied the other, and advanced from
his place of concealment. This is a fortunate
meeting.
I should rather term it unfortunate, considering
the place we are in. But, Mauns, how have you
escaped
from the State House?
By means of the great clock at the gable end.
The clock! how did that assist you?
When they locked me up for the night, I crawled
in among the works, and descended by the ropes by
which the weights are suspended.
[1]
[1]
One of the worthies of the revolution stated to the author
that this means of escape was successfully put in practice by a
prisoner, he therefore trusts it may not be considered romance,
improbable as it may appear.
An ingenious mode, truly. I presume you lost no
time while you were in the clock, said Jurian.
No, I lost no time, replied Mauns, paying no
attention
to the attempt at a witticism.
The hand of Providence has brought us together,
and will point out the path we are to pursue,
exclaimed
the hollow voice of the mendicant.
Who is that? demanded Jurian.
It is Corwin, the maniac. He came from his
place of concealment, and Mauns continuedWe
are about to attempt to escape, and you, of course, sir,
will accompany us.
I cannot leave here at present.
Nor do I know that we can, replied honest
Mauns, but still it is worth the trial.
The snares of Satan have encompassed him, and
he fears to break the web, said Corwin, in a solemn
tone.
Are you on parole, sir? demanded the sergeant.
No; but in honour bound to remain here until
to-morrow
.
That he may spill the blood of a fellow mortal, or
have the sluices of his own heart opened, continued
Corwin.
How have you learnt this already?
The knowledge of it is not confined to me; it is
known where it will be remembered, continued the
mendicant, pointing above. Pause, ere thou art
sullied
with a stain that no tears can wash away.
Impossible; it is now too late.
And thou art prepared to go forth and do the deed
that hath the primeval curse upon it. Obdurate boy,
rocks have been dissolved to water, and steel become
pliable, but who hath the skill to change the heart of
man when it rises in rebellion against the laws of God!
The solemn manner of Corwin had an effect upon the
mind of Jurian, who replied
You may torture my feelings, but cannot change
my purpose, and at the same time moved off, as if
about to leave them.
Ay, turn from me, cried the mendicant, for he
who defies his heavenly Father, need not hesitate to
treat with contempt his earthly sire.
The conduct of Corwin from the first had made a
deep impression upon the mind of Jurian, which was
increased at each succeeding interview. There was
nothing definite to be gathered from the vague
expressions
that escaped the unhappy man, and though
Jurian
at times supposed them to be nothing more than
the incoherencies of a man devoid of reason, still he
could not wholly relieve his mind from the idea that
there was a link which joined his fate, in some degree,
with that of the wretched wanderer. But the nature
of the tie it was impossible to divine. This idea now
prevailed in all its force, and as the desire of
ascertaining
his parentage had long been an all-absorbing
thought, as Corwin concluded, the young man clasped
his hands, tottered towards him, and fell upon his
neck
Are you my father? Speak, O! speak, are you
my father?
I know not what I say. I am not, though the time
has been when I would freely have given all that this
world affords to have called thee son. But it might not
be, and so my heart was broken and my brain was
turned.
The moon emerged from behind a dense cloud, and
shone full upon the face of Corwin, which was raised
above, and indicated the acuteness of his feelings.
Speak, exclaimed Jurian, and relieve me from
this agony of suspense: speak, do you know my
father
?
The whole frame of the maniac trembled violently;
he burst into a wild laugh, which having subsided, he
replied in a tremulous and guttural tone
Know him! I have cause to know him. The
angels
of heaven have recorded my injuries, and the
demons
of hell have registered his crime in characters of
never-dying flame. Know him! yea, as the victim
knows the serpent that has stung him.
My mother; speak to me of my mother.
Corwin shrunk from him, while a convulsive sob for
a few moments obstructed his voice, and he replied, in
the utmost agitation
Peace, thou poor unfortunate, ere you set my
death-wound bleeding afresh, and call forth the curse
of the child upon the grey head of the parent.
My mother; speak to me of her. Does she still
live?
If to endure the unceasing gnawings of remorse
can be termed living, she lives, but only to undergo in
this world, the sufferings of the world to come. He
stared vacantly at Jurian, and laughed wildly. If this
be living, I am among the living too; I am not ready
for the grave yet, though dead to all creation save
myself
.
In mercy speak.
No; I am not ready for the grave yet, though I
marvel how the earth can bear one so wretched. I
have endured enough to crush a giant's strength, and
still I am not ready for the grave. Pour on, pour on;
what additional weight must I endure!
He tossed his arms, and strode rapidly to and fro
along the pavement.
Guide me to my mother, continued Jurian,
though the most miserable outcast, she is still my
mother, and as such I will reverence and cherish her.
Corwin raised his hands, clenched them across his
forehead, and after remaining in this posture silent for
some time, abruptly exclaimed
My brain aches to bursting; the whirlwind is
there, and the rush of thought comes on in terrible
array
.
Action, action, or I shall go mad.
He took a few hasty strides towards the river, and
Jurian followed him.
Do not leave me yet, he exclaimed, clinging to
him; My fate is in your hands; do not leave me
yet.
I must move, I tell you, or I shall go mad.
Release
your holdI will not be stayed, for I am my own
master yetfree to think and act, wild as my thoughts
and deeds may be, and when they get beyond bounds,
why whips and chains will bring me to reason again.
Ha! ha! ha! a rare way that, a cunning way, indeed.
Whips and chains! whips and chains! Ha! ha! ha!
For pity's sake, satisfy my doubts.
Off, I say, I'll not be restrained. You are not my
keeper yet; not yet; off, off, and let me depart, for I
will harm no one, not even a worm.
He broke from Jurian's hold, and hurried towards
the river; the young men followed, and in a few
moments
they descended the hill that originally formed
the western bank of the majestic Delaware. A sentinel
was pacing the wharf with measured tread; as soon as
Mauns discovered him, he darted forward and arrested
the progress of Corwin, who was advancing without
being conscious of the danger of a discovery, and they
concealed themselves behind a flight of steps which
ascended from the street to the second story of a
building.
By this time an unceasing roll of the drums from the
northern part of the town, and the creaking and
plashing
of oars was heard upon the water. As the moon
emerged like a fairy bark from the ocean of clouds
which almost continually obscured her brightness,
barges, with soldiers on board, were indistinctly seen
passing to the Jersey shore, while others, empty, were
returning to the Pennsylvania side. The sentinel
occasionally
paused to contemplate this movement,
without
being able to form any conjecture as to its
meaning
.
Mauns watched his opportunity, and while the
sentinel's face was turned up the river, intent on what
was passing in that quarter, he darted rapidly forward,
and by clinging to the wharf, let himself drop lightly
into the skiff that lay moored in the shade, out of the
view of the soldier.
Jurian's thoughts were now confined to a single
channel. He was on the eve of drawing the veil from
the mystery that had preyed upon his mind for years,
and all other considerations were absorbed in that
single
thought. The moment had arrived, and if suffered
to pass it might never occur again, he therefore
determined
to follow Corwin, until his doubts should be fully
satisfied. As a dense cloud obscured the face of the
moon the sentinel resumed his heavy tread, but paused
again when the moon reappeared. Jurian now followed
the example of Mauns with equal success, and seated
himself in the bottom of the skiff, in obedience to the
instructions of the other. The greatest difficulty still
remained to be achieved, for Corwin was not yet on
board, and even should he succeed in passing the
sentinel
,
how should they get afloat without being
detected
?
All the wharves were guarded, and should they
suffer the boat to be borne along by the tide without
the use of the oar, they would run great hazard of
being taken or fired upon before they passed the
southern
boundary of the city. Honest Mauns was sorely
puzzled to devise a plan to surmount these difficulties,
as he sat ruminating beneath the shadow of the wharf.
The curiosity of the sentinel was still attracted by
the movements in the north, and at intervals he paused
to scrutinize into what was going forward. Corwin
availed himself of a favourable opportunity to emerge
from his place of concealment, but before he had
reached the edge of the wharf the sentinel turned and
discovered him, and commanded him to stand. He
obeyed, for it was now too late to attempt to escape.
What are you doing here? demanded the sentinel.
Looking out upon the heavens and the water,
replied Corwin, for there is no sight in nature so
well calculated to calm the troubled mind.
By the powers, exclaimed the sentinel, if you
were stationed here for three hours at a stretch, I am
thinking you would be after changing your opinion.
But stand back; this is neither time nor place for
star-gazing
.
I am a harmless man, replied Corwin, and
would but read the book that nature has unfolded to
the gaze of all. Do not drive me from my study.
Faith, master philosopher, you must study
elsewhere
,
so retire within the line.
Come with me, and I will read to you the wonders
of that immeasurable scroll. What a work is there for
the study of man! since every step he takes opens a
new field to explore, and though his brief life were
extended
to the end of time, and he had hourly studied,
until he believed that he had mastered the mysteries
of the universe, still he would find that with all his
labour
he had scarcely taken a drop from the fountain of
knowledge. Come with me.
And what for, demanded the sentinel, should I
study that same book, which from your own showing
I may not understand?
Mauns raised his head above the edge of the wharf
to ascertain what was going forward, and Corwin's
quick eye no sooner perceived him, than he called the
attention of the sentinel to an opposite direction.
Behold that star in the west, that brilliant star, just
above the horizon, that shines forth as a queen amidst
her satellites. Move this way, and you will see the
star I mean.
Botheration, now, and don't I know her as well as
I do my own mother's son? She's one of the planters;
but by the powers, master philosopher, if you were to
see the stars we have in sweet Ireland, you would be
ashamed of this blarney about your rushlights here.
The smallest among them is as big as your moon, and
bigger too. Such a twinkler as that now, wouldn't be
noticed at all at all. But this is a new country, and
the like may answer until it becomes thickly settled;
but when your population thickens it will never do. Of
a dark night now, you will be beautifully bothered to
find your way with nothing more than a firefly-lamp
like that to light you. Don't come over me, I say, with
the pride of your stars, for even your moon itself is as
dull as a pewter pint-pot.
During this bravado of the sentinel his back was
turned towards the river, and Corwin made a sign to
Mauns to push off with the boat, as he himself had
abandoned all hope of escaping by that means. Mauns
understood the signal, and lost no time in fixing the
oars and cutting the rope by which the boat was
secured
.
This was attended with some noise, which
attracted
the notice of the sentinel, and the boat no sooner
emerged from the shade than he discovered and hailed
it. Mauns returned no answer, but seated himself and
seized hold of the oars.
Hold on, and give the word, cried the sentinel,
or by all the saints in the calendar, I will blow you
out of water.
The king, returned Mauns, who had fortunately
overheard the man who left the boat give the word as
he landed.
Right, replied the sentinel. What is the
meaning
of all this commotion in the upper part of the town;
have you heard?
The yagers are under marching orders, replied
the other, at the same time dashing his oars lightly
into the water.
You told me you were colonel Lindsay's servant.
Has he a command in this expedition?
No; his quarters are too comfortable. Good
night, which reply was accompanied by a second pull
at the oars.
Hold on. Who is that with you?
A friend.
But what has become of your brogue, Sawney?
demanded the sentinel, who perceived that the voice
was different from that of Lindsay's servant: By the
mass it was as thick as my leg not half an hour ago,
and now you speak as clear as a whistle. Hold on, and
tell me what you have done with your brogue, man.
Mauns made no reply, but pulled away at the oars.
Hold on, I say, or I shall pepper your jacket.
As this threat failed to arrest the progress of the skiff,
the sentinel raised his gun to put it in execution, when
Corwin, who had stood near him during the foregoing,
intent on the result, sprang forward and seized the gun,
as it was elevated to his shoulder. The soldier, thus
taken by surprise, was soon disarmed, and Corwin
threw the gun to the ground, when a scuffle ensued,
the result of which was doubtful for some moments,
VOL. II.O
the sentinel having the advantage on the score of
activity
,
which was counterbalanced by Corwin's superior
strength and stature. Fortune, however, soon decided
in favour of the latter. The contest took place near
the edge of the wharf, and the sentinel, in endeavouring
to disengage himself from the grasp of Corwin, made
a sudden and powerful effort to break from him, which
was successful, but unluckily his impetus was so great
that he could not check it before he reached the river.
He no sooner arose to the surface of the water than
he cried out lustily for assistance, and Corwin
perceiving
that he was a good swimmer, and in no danger,
darted up the street by which he had descended, and
soon disappeared. Mauns, in the mean time, made
the light skiff glide over the water as though it had
been a creature of the element, and the sentinel having
regained the wharf, clambered up, muttering
imprecations
upon the head of the star-gazing philosopher.
His cries for assistance had by this time brought
several soldiers to the spot, and as the boat was still
in sight, the cause of the alarm was soon made known,
notwithstanding the confusion into which the passion
of the Hibernian had thrown his ideas. As he stood
dripping on the wharf, he urged his comrades to search
for the star-gazing philosopher, as he termed Corwin,
and seemed to consider the escape of the prisoners in
the boat a matter of minor importance, provided he
could be found. The moon also came in for a share of
his ill humour, and he protested that the accident
would not have occurred had she only shown as bright
as a tin saucepan, that he might have seen what he
was doing; and then he deplored the condition of the
country, being so badly lighted, and protested roundly
that as the population increased, we should never be
able to get along at all, of cloudy nights, without
sending
to Europe to get a new moon manufactured.
Many were long of the sentinel's opinion with regard
to every thing else but the moon.
The alarm having passed from one sentinel to
another
,
boats were seen putting off from different
wharves in pursuit of the fugitives, and at intervals a
gun was fired in order to arrest their progress, but it
had a contrary effect, and made Talman redouble his
exertions. As he heard the creaking of oars in his
wake, he remarked in a tone that approximated
boasting
,
that he must be a skilful waterman who overtook
them, for he could feather an oar with any man on the
river, wind and tide favouring.
Before they had passed the southern boundary of
the city, half a dozen boats had commenced the
pursuit
,
and an occasional shot was fired after them by
the sentinels on the wharves. Fortunately the tide
was ebbing rapidly, the skiff was a light one, and
Mauns had not boasted of his skill at the oar without
reason, for the little vessel glided over the surface
with all the buoyancy of a water-fowl, while the
lumbering
barges were labouring wearily after her.
Scarcely
a sound was heard to proceed from the oars as they
were lightly dipped in the water by the skilful Mauns,
while those of the barges creaked lazily on their pivots
at every stroke that was taken. It was not long before
Mauns had outstripped his pursuers, and they were
lost sight of in the obscurity of the night, still the
creaking of the oars, borne by the breeze over the
surface
of the water, denoted that they were following in
his wake. For half an hour the chase continued, but
as there was no sound to guide them in the pursuit,
they paused, and after a short consultation, turned their
boats and pulled against the tide for the city. The quick
ear of Mauns caught the sound, and understanding
the movement he relaxed in his exertions, at the same
time remarking, with an air of triumph, that they might
as well send a buzzard after a red-neck, as such
lubbers
in pursuit of a Swede on the water. Mauns was
not much given to boasting, but he prided himself upon
his skill at the oar, and at times he was disposed to
make known that he considered himself a little
superior
to any other in this branch of science. This was
an excusable piece of vanity in Mauns, and one that he
shared in common with the rest of mankind, for most
of us imagine we possess some faculty peculiar to
ourselves
,
and he who can balance a pole upon his nose,
or eat six pounds of bacon at a meal, boldly challenges
the admiration of all, and considers himself the eighth
wonder of the world.
Jurian during their progress down the river
remained
silent, for he had failed in the accomplishment of
that which he most earnestly desired. His hopes had
been defeated by the absence of Corwin, and when he
perceived that there was no prospect of his getting on
board the boat, his first impulse was to spring on shore,
and remain with the mysterious man, with whose fate
he believed his own to be intimately connected. This
feeling was, however, checked by reflecting that by so
doing he would totally defeat honest Talman's
prospects
of escape, and that no personal consideration
would justify a step of the kind. He accordingly
remained
passive.
The following morning at the time appointed,
Balcarras
and his two friends were upon the wharf, where
they waited impatiently for about an hour, at a loss to
account for the tardiness of the other party.
What can it mean? demanded Balcarras. It
cannot be possible that he has become craven.
My life on it, his courage is not to be questioned,
replied Morton.
You may say that, replied M`Druid, and if
questioned, it is not here to answer it.
There is no sign of the boat, and yet Sawney
protests
that he moored it safely at the wharf, said
Balcarras
.
The servant called half a dozen saints to bear
witness
to the truth of what he asserted, and again
pointed
out the spot where he had secured it.
It is all very comical, by my hilts, exclaimed
M`Druid, and having grown weary of waiting, they
returned
to their breakfast with rather an unfavourable
opinion of the honour and courage of the young
American
,
though with a much better appetite for their
meal than if they had found him at the place appointed.
Physiologists agree that there is nothing that tends so
completely to the destruction of appetite as a duel
before
breakfast.
5*
CHAPTER IV.
Soldiers! those German gentlemen are bought
For four pounds eight and seven-pence per man,
By England's kinga bargain, as 'tis thought.
Are we worth more? Let's prove it now we can
For we must beat them, boys, by set of sun,
Or Mary Stark's a widow.It was done.
Halleck
.
We
are once again beyond the reach of the red
jackets, said Mauns, resting on his oars, as he heard
the barges returning, and though a polished set of
gentlemen, I am not sorry to be rid of their company.
I rejoice in your escape, Mauns, more than I do
in my own, replied Jurian, for gladly would I be in
my prison again.
That is strange! your prison must have been
more comfortable than mine was, or you would never
express a wish of that nature. For my part I am
perfectly
satisfied where I am, and they will not catch me
among them again with my own consent.
And now I have had time to reflect, said Jurian,
my escape may be the means of saving myself.
True, I have been disappointed in what was nearest
my heart, but I may procure the means of redeeming
my honour, and as to Balcarras, another time may
occur.
This was all unintelligible to Mauns, and was
spoken
in a tone that betrayed that he was rather
communing
with himself than addressing another. When
Jurian perceived that poor Miriam had fallen into the
hands of her mother, he abandoned the hope that she
would be able to fulfil the mission she had undertaken,
but as he now had it in his own power, he felt less
chagrin at the absence of Corwin, and being obliged
to leave his honour in the hands of Balcarras.
Talman
still rested on the oars, and suffered the boat to
float with the tide.
You have overexerted yourself, sergeant, said
Jurian; permit me to take the oars.
My wound pains, sir, a little, replied Mauns, or
I would not give my seat up to the best boatman on
the water.
I am familiar with your skill, replied Jurian, for
many a time have we been fishing and duck-shooting
together, it is therefore useless to make a display
before
me at the risk of your health; so exchange seats,
my good fellow.
Those were happy times, sir, replied Mauns,
seating his tall figure in the stern of the boat, while
Jurian took charge of the oars. Those were happy
times, indeed. There was but one man in all Tinicum
could pull an oar with me. You remember Aoki Shell;
a smart fellow was that Aoki!he understood drawing
a seine, and was a pretty good shot at fifty yards, but
then he was wonderfully given to bragging.
The sheldrake he shot from the Point in the
season
of '66 made a good story, and he spoke of little
else throughout the year, replied Jurian.
You havn't forgot the sheldrake. What a famous
story he made of it by the time he was done.
I remember, replied Jurian, the fifty yards had
extended to one hundred and fifty, and the drake had
grown to a swan. But what has become of him?
From that day he set up for a marksman,
continued
Mauns, and considering the game in these
parts too small for a shot like himself, he sold his boat
and the few things he had gathered around him and
started for the back settlements, with no property but
his rifle on his shoulder. He since wrote to me that
he was doing well, and was the best shot within fifty
miles of him.
That's the way with us all, said Jurian, we are
never at rest until we have the reputation of doing
something better than our neighbours, and he is a
happy man, indeed, whose ambition is fully gratified
in being the best shot in a village. Armies have been
slaughtered, and kingdoms overthrown, to attain a
distinction
which, in the end, amounted to little more
than this. No one is willing to stand upon a line with
his fellows. From the monarch down to the beggar,
we scarcely meet with one who is not possessed of
some peculiar faculty for which he challenges the
admiration
of mankind. The king fills his throne with
unrivalled dignity; another bestrides a horse with
superior
grace; a third will hop ten feet backwards; and
the poor beggar who lives on common charity, when
every other source of pride is destroyed, will boast
that he can catch his vermin with greater skill than
another.
Jurian now plied the oars briskly and with skill, and
as they glided along, Mauns repeatedly reminded him
that he had acquired the art under his tuition. As the
tide was in their favour it was not long before they
arrived in front of fort Mercer, upon Red Bank, at
that time under the command of colonel Green. As
they were stepping ashore, they were hailed by the
sentinel who was seen by the moonlight pacing on the
outworks of the fortification above. Jurian answered
him, and stated that they were prisoners who had just
escaped from the city and wished to gain admittance
into the fort, as they had information of importance to
communicate. In a short time a guard came from the
fort, and the prisoners, in compliance with their wishes,
were conducted to the commander, and immediately
recognised to the friends by several of the soldiers.
Jurian made known that the enemy had an expedition
on foot, but to what point it was directed, he was
unable
to say with certainty; but they had ascertained
that the troops were forming upon the Jersey shore,
under the command of colonel Donop, and fort Mercer
was as liable to the attacked as any other strong hold,
as the British army could not have a free communication
with the fleet, as long as this place, and fort Mifflin, on
the island opposite, remained invested by the Americans.
Of this colonel Green was aware, and plainly foresaw
that an attempt would shortly be made to dislodge him:
but as he knew the importance of his station, he
determined
to hold out to the last extremity. A boat was
speedily launched, and the report communicated to
colonel Smith, the commander of fort Mifflin, who
disposed
of his slender forces to the greatest advantage,
as he hd every reason to apprehend that in case of an
attack, a desperate and bloody conflict would ensue.
At a late hour the following day, a strong detachment
of Hessians was seen marching along the eastern bank
of the river, until they arrived in the rear of fort
Mercer
,
where they halted, and formed a line of battle. The
Americans witnessed the formidable array with
considerable
emotion, which was not abated, when they
beheld
a flag approaching, with a demand to surrender
the fort in the most peremptory terms. Colonel Green
replied
I shall defend the fort to the last extremity.
Your walls are unfinished and unmanned, said the
officer, taking a view of the imperfect ramparts.
The less blood will be spilt upon the occasion,
replied Green.
What answer shall I bear?
Tell your commander, if he wants the fort, he must
fight for it, and fight bravely.
The officer with the flag turned his horse and
galloped
toward the main body, and having reported the
answer
,
concluded with stating that the garrison was very
small, and the outworks not half completed. This
information increased the hopes of the rugged Donop,
and in a short time the attack commenced, when the
Americans, finding their number too small to man the
outer intrenchment with effect, in consequenc of its
extent and unfinished state, after a vigorous resistance,
withdrew into the bodyof the redoubt, whichh afforded
a better covering. The Hessians perceiving the fire
from the outward battery to abate, pushed forward, and
mounted the rampart, when a joyful shout denoted that
they imagined they had obtained an almost bloodless
victroy; but a sharp discharge of musketry soon
dissipated
the idea, and presented a new aspect of the affray,
for numbers reeled from the breastwork into the ditch
beneath, where they perished. Disappointment aroused
the determination of the assailants, who pressed on, to
avenge the death of their comrades. Thhe conflict every
moment became more sanguinary, and count Donop,
who was charging with great intrepidity at the head of
hhis forces, was wounded and taken prisoner, when thhe
Hessians fell back in dismay, but were soon rallied
again by colonel Mingerode, the second in command.
They marched to the charge withh unfaltering step,
and were met with equal determination by the
Americans
.
The rattling of musketry was now unceasing,
which was occasinally drowned in the deep thunder
of the cannon, rolling across the river, for the attack
upon fort Mifflin had also commenced with spirit. As
colonel Mingerode had received a dangerous wound,
and several of his best officers were either killed or
disabled
,
confusion prevailed throughout the ranks of the
Hessians, and after sustaining a loss of five hundred
men, they were obliged to retreat precipitately; in doing
which they suffered severely by the fire of the
American
gallies and floating batteries.
A brisk cannonading was still kept up on the
Pennsylvania
side of the Delaware, between fort Mifflin and
a portion of the British fleet. The shipping, in
consequence
of the obstructions which the Americans had
sunk in the bed of the river, had much difficulty in
reaching the post assigned them, from which they
poured in incessant and heavy fire. The shades of
night were now rapidly approaching, and from fort
Mercer the black hulks of the ships of war were
imperfectly
traced on the deep gloom that lay beyond in
the west, except at intervals, when the blaze of a
broadside, like a flash of lightning, illuminated the spot
for a moment, and then passed away, leaving the
darkness
more impervious than before. The garrison at
Red Bank were anxious spectators of the scene, for
whatever mighht be the result, it was out of their power
to participate effectually in thhe engagement. Still an
occasional shot was sent booming over the water, to
proclaim to their friends the interest they felt, rather
than as a messenger of ill to the enemy.
Jurian and his companion were contemplating from
the breakstork of the fort the interesting conflict, and
though fatigued by their exertions to repulse the attack
of the yagers, still they were impatient to play a part
in the stirring scene before them.
We came, sir, in good time to be of service, said
Mauns. This, now, is much better than lying idle
in the enemy's quarters.
Much better, replied Jurian, without turning his
eyes from the scene of carnage.
I should like to be among them, continued Manus,
for I am thinking my skill at the oar might come in
play before it is over, and I should be proud to show
them how to manage a boat on suc an occasion.
Jurian smiled at the remark of the hhonest Swede
but made no reply, while the othher leisurely stretched
his long limbs upon the rampart, and supporting his
head upon his right hand, contemplated the battle in
silence.
That shot was well directed, exclaimed Jurian,
as several pieces were simulataneously discharged from
the fort on the island.
Every grape told, I'll warrant you, responded
Mauns.
It is hard, sergeant, that we must lay idle with
such a scene in view.
Very hard, indeed, sir. If Aoko Shell were only
here with his gun, something might be done even at
this distance.
Look there; is not the Merlin shifting her
moorings
?
She is; she must have had a warm berth of it
where she lay.
And had she continued longer, Mauns, she might
have been cooled in hte water.
The dark form of the vessel was now seen slowly
moving down the river, and when she had arrived
beyond
the reach of the fort, the firing ceased for a
brieinterval
.
She is a cripple, sergeant, and walks as it were
uponcrutches through the water.
Rather like a red-neck, sir, with a broken wing,
replied Mauns. But mark the course she is steering!
Twenty yards farther and she will be upon the bar.
They have bad pilots aboard for our waters,
sergeant
,
that is clear. But why has the firing ceased?
This calm is more awful than the rattling of artillery.
True, sir; I must say I like the storm better, and
wish they would finish the business without loss of
time, since it must be settled.
Mauns had scarcely ceased speaking when the
stillpess
of the nighht was again broken by thhe deep-toned
thunder of the cannon, which was succeeded by a
sudden
flash of light and a tremendous explosion, which
agitated the river and shook the foundation of the fort
on the Jersey shore. Every eye was turned towards
the spot in fearful suspense, when, bursting through
volumes of dense smoke, large flakes of fire
betrayed
that one of the vessels was enveloped in that
consuming
element. As the flames gained the
ascendency
,
and were reflected in the water beneath, the
light was so powerful that the movements of those on
board could be distinctly seen.
What is the meaning of this, sir? demanded
Mauns.
The sloop is aground, and no doubt the crew have
fired her, replied Jurian. Bad pilots, sergeant.
They have not fished there as often as we have.
I knew she must find the bar, unless she made
short tack of it, replied Mauns, and shouted
Victory
!
victory! whle every voice in the garrison
reechoed
the joyful shout. All was bustle and confusion
on board the hurning ship, and numbers threw
themselves
overboard and swam to the nearest vessel,
while others let down the boats and leaping into them,
rowed for life from the scene of destruction. The
American gallies were seen moving to and fro in the
blaze, and pouring a destructive fire upon thhe fugitive
enemy.
Do but mark thhat boat, sir, said Mauns, who
watched with increasing interest the movements of the
different craft, I mean that one nearest the Merlin.
I see the boat you mean; but why does that one
in particular attract your notice?
There's not a man on board, sir, who understands
the use of the oar, or she would never move through
the water in thhhat lazy fashion. Now, for my part I
dislike to see men pretend to matters they do not
understand
,
for they only expose themselves, Mr.
Hartfield
.
And they have exposed themselves with a
vengeance
,
for see, there goes a barge in pursuit of them.
It serves them rightPull away, boy! steady!
There are some knowing ones, I warrant you, at the
oars in that barge, for see how lightly she moves, as
VOL. II.6
though she were a creature bred in the water. Pull
away! There, now, is a sight worth looking after.
They gain upon her; the boat must be captured.
It serves them right, sir; they should have stuck
to the Merlin, for what have men to expect from a
boat who do not know how to handle an oar?
The Merlin was scarcely cleared before similar
bustle
and confusion prevailed on board the Augusta man
of war, which was also grounded at a short distance
from the other. In a little while the deck was cleared,
with the exception of four or five seamen, who were
busily engaged before they abandoned her. The
burning
sloop sent forth so strong and steady a light, that
the dancing waters shone like a sheet of liquid fire, and
reflected every object that passed over their glittering
surface. The cannonading had subsided, but still the
British were annoyed by a discharge of musketry from
the floating batteries. All the shipping, except the two
alredy mentinoed, now withdrew with the utmost
expedition
,
and when sufficient time had been allowed
them to sail beyond danger, the few seamen who
remained
on board of the Augusta descended into a boat,
and rowing down the river, soon disappeared in the
obscurity of the night. The skill they displayed called
forth the admiration of honest Mauns in as great a
degree
as the want of it in the former boat had his
censure
,
and in after-life, whenever he attempted a
description
of the attack upon fort Mifflin, these two
boats were sure to carry off the whole interest of his
story.
A dead calm now succeeded, which was only broken
by the crackling of the spars and the roaring of the
flames as they flaunted in the night breeze. The
sailors
had not forsaken the latter vessel long before a
second explosion took place, and as the smoke
dispersed
the Augusta was discovered to be in flames,
which ascended the rigging with the rapidity of
lightning
,
to the top of the masts, and presented as
imposing
spectacle to the victors, who looked out in
admiration
from their galleys, stationed in different parts of
the river. The British had retired to a distance, and
many a proud spirit paced the deck that night with
feelings of the bitterest mortification, and repeatedly
paused to gaze at the consuming vessels, until they
wer burnt to the water's edge.
The following morning the melancholy office of
burying the dead devolved upon the garrison at fort
Mercer; and among others whom they consigned to
the dust was colonel Donop, who led on to the assault
the preceding evening: his wounds were beyond
human
aid, and he died shortly after he was taken
prisoner
,
and was buried beyond the fort, where his tomb
is still to be seen.
No useless coffin confin'd his breast,
Nor in sheet nor in shroud they bound him,
But he lay like a warrior taking his rest,
With his martial cloak around him.
In the course of the day, Jurian and his companion
left fort Mercer, crossed to the Pennsylvania shore,
and pursued their course towards the main body of the
army, under the command of Washington.
The British commanders were not discouraged by
the unfavourable result of these attempts, for such was
the importance of opening the navigation of the
Delaware
,
that they resolved to leave no means unassayed
to accomplish it. Accordingly, the garrisons were
almost daily annoyed, until the morning of the 15th of
November, when the whole British fire was directed
towards fort Mifflin, from their land batteies on
Province
island, and their shipping in the river. The small
garrison of three hundred men sustained the shock with
intrepidity for several hours, but towards the middle of
the day, the works were battered down, and the ditches
filled with their ruins; their situation now became
critical
,
and officers and men expected their fate in the
midst of carnage. Night put an end to the
cannonading
,
but as the Americans perceived the English were
taking measures for storming the body of the fortress
the following morning, and being sensible that in the
present state of things it was indefensible, they removed
their military stores, fired the barracks, and crossed
the river to Red Bank at twelve o'clock at night, and
the next day the British took possession of the smoking
ruins.
It still remained to dislodge the soldiers of Congress
from Red Bank, before the obstructions of the
Delaware
could be entirely removed. This operation was
of absolute necessity; for although occasional vessels
brought scanty supplies of provisions to Philadelphia,
from the country about Chester, where the inhabitants
were well affected towards the royal cause, yet the
scarcity in the city became daily more distressing; and
it was difficult to procure firewood on any terms.
On the night of the 18th of November, lord
Cornwallis
marched with a considerable force, and the next
day crossed the Delaware on his way to Red Bank.
Upon the news of their approach, some continental
generals were appointed to give colonel Green, who
commanded the garrison, their opinion as to the
expediency
of waiting the attack. They favoured an
evacuation
,
and wished that he would join them. He
answered
I
shall follow your directions, either to
evacuate
or defend the fort. I know what we have done when
the works were not half completed; and now they are
finished, I am not afraid of the event. But the
direction
was to evacuate, which was complied with, though
with manifest reluctance; and the British shortly after
dismantled the fort, and demolished all the works.
The American shipping having now lost all
protection
,
several of the galleys and other armed vessels took
the advantage of a favourable night, kept close in with
the Jersey shore, passed the batteries of Philadelphia,
and escaped to places of security higher up the river.
The enemy, on perceiving this transaction, took the
precaution to prevent the escape of a considerable
number
,
which being completely environed, were abandoned
by their crews and fired. The British, having secured
the command of the river, laboured to clear it of all the
impediments with which the Americans had obstructed
the channel.
About the middle of December, after making a
general
forage on the western side of the Schuylkill, sir
William Howe determined to retire to winter quarters
at Philadelphia; and Washington, who had fruitlessly
endeavoured to tempt him to an attack, while encamped
on Chesnut Hill, felt the necessity of providing
immediate
winter quarters for his suffering, and almost
disheartened
troops. He accordingly commenced his
march towards Valley Forge. The season was
inclement
,
and the soldiers were so ill clothed, that some
were seen to drop down dead with cold, while others,
without shoes and stockings, had their feet cut by the
frozen ground, and left their tracks in blood, from
White Marsh to Valley Forge. After the most painful
efforts, the troops reached their destined quarters on
the 19th of December.
This was the most critical period of the revolution.
The American soldiers were worn down with fatigue and
suffering,without sufficient food, and nearly naked in
the depth of winter;disheartened by a campaign
rather unsuccessful, and encouraged in their discontent
by certain officers, who, envious of the
commander-in-chief
,
in order to tarnish his glory and effect his removal,
readily attributed to him all the privations the
soldiery
were doomed to undergo. The victories of the
northern army were enlarged upon, and invidious
comparisons
were drawn between Gates and Washington,
to the disadvantage of the latter. He was openly
charged with incapacity, and these slanders were not
confined to private individuals, but were repeated by
men in office, and from the several state legislatures
6*
resounded in the hall of Congress. The object of these
machinations was to induce Washington to retire in
disgust from the head of the army, and thus make room
for the promotion of Gates to the exalted station.
Pennsylvania
was chagrined at the loss of her capital, and
on the report that Washington was moving into winter
quarters, the assembly addressed a remonstrance to
Congress, severely censuring the measure, and plainly
expressing their dissatisfaction at the mode in which the
war had been conducted. Such was the state of public
feeling, when Washington was struggling to keep the
remnant of his exhausted army together, knowing that
the liberties of the country depended upon the event.
The soldiers were too ill clothed to admit of being
exposed
to the inclemency of that season, under mere
tents; and when it was proposed that a sufficient
number
of huts should be built of logs and mortar, in which
they would find more effectual shelter, some treated the
idea as ridiculous, and few thought it practicable; they
however immediately set about constructing their
habitations
,
which were erected upon the plan of a regular
city. All was in active motion; some cut down trees,
while others fashioned them, and in a short time all the
barracks were completed, and the soldiers comfortably
lodged.
CHAPTER V.
A worthy man is Stephano, but too much prone to talking.
Old Play
.
Habit
has been pronounced a second nature, and
its influence over major M`Druid was truly remarkable.
The State House clock seldom rung four, post
meridian
,
without his starting from his seat, should he
peradventure be sitting, and drawing from his fob a
massy silver watch of curious workmanship, he would
test the accuracy of the town timepiece. He would
then pull his shirt collar above his black stock, and
endeavour to brush up the nap on his foxy beaver, in
order to give himself a more buckish appearance
before
he sallied forth, for the major had seen enough of
the world to know that a fair outside will make even a
counterfeit coin pass currently, while a genuine one, a
little tarnished, is frequently rejected.
But what was the reason of the major's propensity
to walk at the hour of four? He had discovered that
it was an ancient custom in 'squire Morton's family to
set the wine circulating daily at that hour, and it has
already been shown that the major was strict in his
devotions to the fire-begotten, provided another
furnished
the libation: we do not mean to insinuate that
this was the sole cause of his periodical visits; it
would be improper in us so to do, for certain it is Miss
Buckley attributed the frequency of his calls to a
widely
different motive, and she had an opportunity of
forming a correct opinion on the subject; still it had
its influence on the major, and doubtless would have
led to the result mentioned, without the additional
attraction.
The major and the 'squire had fairly discussed the
merits of a second bottle of the Anno Domini '65,
when a servant informed the latter that the earl of
Balcarras
desired to see him in another apartment, and as
he withdrew Miss Buckley entered to entertain the
major. She seated herself upon the extremity of the
sofa upon which M`Druid was anchored, and casting
a fascinating look upon the soldier, began to open her
battery.
It is astonishing to me, major, that a gentleman of
your gallantry and address should have passed through
life without having your heart perforated by the shafts
of Cupid.
By my hilts, replied the major, excuse the
coarseness of my favourite expression; my heart has
been a target for the blind god to shoot at from the
age of fifteen to the present speaking, and I am of
opinion, before he is done with his sport, he will leave
it like a cullender.
A just comparison, major, as they appear to
possess
equal powers of retaining what they receive.
Smaller particles may escape, madam, continued
the major, while all that is valuable is still retained.
But there is no hole large enough to permit a lady to
pass, I promise you.
If so, replied the spinster, how is it that you
have never ventured upon the connubial state? Ah!
major, I fear you are a reprobate after all, and credit
the cant abuse of matrimony.
She looked uncommonly fascinating as she
concluded
;
that is to say, as much so as the nature of
things would admit, for Cupid somehow loses his
rosy smiles when dangled on the knee by father Time;
still she looked archly, and the major recognised the
signal, and sat more erect upon the sofa. His rosy face
mantled with what was intended to be an engaging
smile, but the spirit of wine was in him, and like most
men who attempt to look remarkably sagacious while
in that condition, by some strange mistake he moved
the wrong muscles of his countenance, and appeared
more like a simpleton than became a man of his age
and distinction.
You do me injustice, he replied, bowing. I
consider the marriage state the happiest that can be
entered upon in the walks of civil life; but for a
military
man, Miss Buckley, that changes the whole
complexion
of affairsa military man
The major's words became thick and his ideas
confused, and accordingly he forgot to conclude his
sentence, for he did not belong to that numerous class
who consider words the only essential part of
conversation
,
and ventilator-like are kept in constant motion
by the slightest puff of wind. Miss Buckley, however,
was differently constituted, and thinking it but idle
waste of time to wait until he could collect himself,
she continued
You are right, major; though we sometimes meet
with a pair who wrangle like Xantippe and Zoroaster,
yet, on the other hand, we are gratified by seeing
numbers
imitate the example of Plutarch and Laura, and
Peter and Harriet.
The major drew his large hand slowly across his
capacious forehead, in order to confine his wandering
ideas within as small a compass as possible, and after
a few moments of silence, he gave a deep
hem
, and
said
Peter and Harriet! Some of your neighbours,
perhaps? Really, madam, I have not the pleasure of
an acquaintance with the happy couple.
Their melancholy fate, replied the spinster, is
recorded in the Roman history, and remains a lasting
example of female fortitude and constancy.
In the Roman history, replied M`Druid, that
was before my time; I however remember something
about one Petus and Arria, which in truth is a very
pretty story, and for any thing I know the modern
historians
may have changed the names of the parties in
the translation.
I think, said the spinster, that such an example
of constancy should silence the sneers of the railers
against matrimony.
I think so, too, replied the major.
And when we are told that Alexander the Great
swam the Red Sea to visit a Herowhat are we to
think then, major?
Thinkthat he was a master in the art of
swimming
,
replied M`Druid, gravely.
Nothing else, major? demanded the spinster, at
the same time bestowing an expressive glance, by way
of prompting an answer.
Yes, madam, I should pronounce John Mandeville
a spalpeen in the art of lying, compared to the man
who would venture to record such a fable for gospel.
Then you don't credit it?
By my hilts, madam, not until I see it, unless I am
to understand that you vouch for its authenticity.
O! major, major, exclaimed the spinster, I
find you are a downright heretic after all. You may
talk of your heart being a target for Cupid, but you
know nothing of the power of love. You are the first
of your sex that ever denied that Alexander the Great
swam the Red Sea.
The conversation now turned upon the conduct of
Jurian in avoiding the duel with Balcarras. The
subject
had been enlarged upon in the family circle, to
the disadvantage of our hero, for the purpose of
estranging
the affections of Agatha, for it is one of the
irreconcilable contradictions in the composition of
woman
,
that while she recoils and sickens at the sight of
human blood, she will despise and avoid the man who
refuses to imbue his hands in it. Still the
representations
of the conduct of her lover had little effect upon
the mind of Agatha, for she well knew that cowardice
had not influenced the step he had taken. Her father
declaimed in good set terms against him, and her aunt,
in whose bosom chivalry and romance still smoked in
the embers, was eloquent on the subject, and brought
Richard Cur de Lion, Peter the Hermit, and Don
Quixotte, to bear her out in the assertion that he had
forfeited all claim to female regardnotwithstanding
which Agatha obstinately remained of a different way
of thinking.
It is remarkable how firm the most timid and
undecided
female will become on a subject of this nature.
It is not uncommon to behold a delicate creature, as
ethereal as if she were nourished by `the chameleon's
dish;' so timid that she will tremble as the aspen leaf,
if the wind but pipe hoarsely; sensitive as the mimosa
that shrinks within itself, if the minutest insect in
nature
crawl upon it; one that would blush blood deep,
should you presume to imagine that there was any
thing corporeal between the ankle and the chin; and
yet this delicate creature, so timid, so sensitive, so
modest, speaking in the vernacular, when a man is in
the case, possesses the surprising faculty of divesting
herself of all the qualities just enumerated, and
assuming
their very opposites, as if nature knew not what she
was about when she mingled the materials. And why
is this? The fact is such, but as we have not leisure
to analyze the subject, we must leave it to the ladies
themselves to explain.
We have said that Miss Buckley had changed the
subject of conversation to Jurian's conduct. She had
delivered her sentiments in the same strain for the
twentieth time, to which M`Druid listened with all the
drowsy patience of a judge who holds court after
dinner
during the summer term. After enumerating the
countless objections to our hero, and descanting on
his presumption in aspiring to the hand of her niece,
she concluded
Under such circumstances, major, there can be no
fear of his entering one of the most respectable
families
of America. We have all set our faces against
him, and my niece's pride will prevent her from
frustrating
our wishes. We know what is due to our
station
,
and the man who marries Miss Morton must be
like Csar's wife, major, take my word for it.
Then, by the powers, he will not be the man for
Miss Morton, take my word for that, replied the
major
.
The spinster affected to blush, and exclaimed
Fie, fie major, what do you mean to insinuate?
Nothing, madam, replied M`Druid.
Nothing! repeated the spinster, stealing a look
that seemed to question his veracity.
Nothing, on the honour of a soldier, responded
the major, gravely.
Miss Buckley's inquisitive look vanished, and she
turned away evidently disappointed, for it is said, and
perhaps truly, that there is nothing so trying to a lady's
patience, as to excite her curiosity and refuse to
gratify
it.
Much to the satisfaction of M`Druid, their
conversation
was interrupted at this critical juncture by the
entrance of 'squire Morton, accompanied by major
Andre and Balcarras, for the old major,
notwithstanding
his unlimited gallantry, was impatient to be relieved
from the burden of a
tte-a-tte
, that he was not in a
condition to sustain with spirit. It is among the
greatest
bores that society imposes upon its votaries, to be
obliged to talk by the hour when you have exhausted
all you have to say during the first five minutes, and
feel that you are becoming excessively stupid while
endeavouring to maintain your character of an
agreeable
fellow. Such were the feelings of the major
during
the foregoing; true, he struggled against them,
but they had gained too great an ascendency to be
thrown off at willwe can therefore account for his
recovering
his usual spirits upon the entrance of the
company, for he felt like one reprieved on his way to
execution. Extremes, it is said, are nearly allied, and
the major's spirits were an evidence of the truth of the
assertion.
Major, exclaimed Andre, we have a project
on foot, and require your assistance to carry it through;
and as it is for a charitable purpose we will take no
refusal.
Och! now, my jewel, at this present speaking I
could not find it in my heart to refuse you any thing,
charitable or otherwise; so name your project.
By way of adding to the amusements of the
winter
,
continued Andre, we propose getting up
theatrical
entertainments, in which the officers will sustain
the principal parts. There is a good theatre in South
street, Delancey and myself have some skill with the
brush, and will decorate the stage. We are now
beating
up for recruits for our dramatic corps, and as soon
as our numbers are filled we shall commence
business
.
I am your man for the heavy line, exclaimed
M`Druid. By my hilts, there is not a better in the
whole army. But you spoke of charity; now, for the
soul of me, I can see nothing like charity in all this,
unless you mean that charity begins at home, and
intend
to pocket the proceeds accordingly, which would
be following the example of stage-managers
throughout
the world.
That is by no means our intention, replied Andre.
The receipts shall be appropriated to the relief of the
widows of our brave comrades who have fallen, and
there are many of them, God knows, who need
assistance
,
however small it may be.
Your heart was ever in the right place, major,
VOL. II.7
replied M`Druid, and when the spark of charity is
kindled to cheer the heart of the widow, never let it be
said that M`Druid was the man to throw cold water
upon it. On or off the stage, I shall ever be ready to
play the fool at woman's bidding; so, major, I say,
mark me for the heavy business, and if you have a
better actor in your company, eggs are not eggs, for
you'll find me no novice in the art, Mr. Manager.
No novice! have you ever tried your wings,
major?
To be sure and I have, and a bold flight I made
of it, my jewel. It was at Drogheda that I made my
first appearance in the Ghost in Hamlet, and by the
powers I played it to the life, that is to say, there was
never seen such a lively ghost on the stage before or
since. It was beautiful.
This is the first I have heard of it, replied Andre.
Read the chronicles of the day, sir, read the
chronicles
of the day, and you will find it somewhere
recorded
that Mr. Phelim M`Druid, having obtained
merited applause by enacting in Terence's comedies
at Father O'Flogagain's grammar school, despised
hiding his candle under a bushel, and accordingly
exhibited
the full blaze of his talents upon the public
stage to the amazement of a numerous audience.
I am astonished at this confession, major, said
Miss Buckley, for we are told that the condition of
players among the Romans was infamous; true, it was
more honourable among the Greeks, but when the
poet Laberius was forced upon the stage by the tyranny
of Csar
Faith, madam, exclaimed M`Druid, we have
little to do with the ancients in the present day; they
had their way of thinking and we have ours; and
though perhaps we look upon players in the same light
as the Romans did, yet we live among them, and treat
them as did the Athenians; and as the business of life
is to sustain life, to my mind it matters little how the
end is attained, provided the means be not vicious.
We are all merely players upon a mighty stage of which
Providence is the manager, and he who struts the hero
of the day should not affect to despise even the
candle-snuffers
of his company, for when the scene closes and
the curtain falls, they must mingle promiscuously
together
.
You were ever a radical, major, replied Andre;
but, pray, tell us how did this frolic of yours
terminate
?
Some said I was a great deal too fat and rosy for
a ghost, continued the major, but, by my hilts, fat as
I was, they came near to making a real ghost of me
before the play was over.
How so?
Having made my face as pale and ghastly as a
pound of meal could make it, I stalked on, truncheon
in hand, and though I say it, was as kingly a looking
ghost as you would see in a summer's day. When I
turned my mealy face upon the audience, shouts of
applause arose, and I of course made three graceful
bows, after the latest fashion, to show that my
breeding
had not been neglected in that particular.
It was quite in character, replied Andre, for
you were playing the ghost of a king.
I never lose sight of nature, no matter what
character
I assume, replied M`Druid, gravely, for
propriety
is the very soul of acting. Horatio and
Marcellus
seeing me so civil, were not quite as much
alarmed as they ought to have been at my presence,
especially as I had directed brimstone to be burnt
behind
the scenes to remind them of the place I came
from. As soon as one of them exclaimed
`Stay; speak; I charge thee, speak;'
I gave him a most kingly look of contempt, just by way
of showing that he was too familiar, and turning short
upon my heel, vanished in a twinkling, amidst a volume
of smoke. It had a prodigious effect, I assure you.
I dare say it had, replied the other.
The torrents of applause had scarcely subsided,
continued the major, when I re-entered upon the
succeeding
scene, in which you know I had nothing to do
but stand still, and look at the players and audience
until the cock crows. I was perfect in the play in all
its parts, and as the actor who appeared as Horatio
preferred his own language to the author's, no
uncommon
circumstance in the profession, instead of
standing
idle on the stage, I did double duty, that of
prompter and ghost at the same time, and in order to
show my parts I prompted as loud as Horatio roared
and ranted. It was a fair trial between us, but the
spalpeen stood no chance, for I had the audience all
on my side, and they applauded my zeal mightily.
I will venture to say they did.
One bad player, continued M`Druid, is enough
to destroy the effect of the whole piece, and so it
proved
in the present instance. The bogtrotter, stationed
behind the scenes to play chanticleer, forgot to crow,
and I became impatient to vanish, but you know could
not conveniently do it without the summons. I waxed
warm at this unpardonable neglect, and in order to
show that I was perfect in the part, while the other
players were going on with the dialogue, I hopped to
the centre of the stage, clapped my arms against my
sides two or three times, and then crowed as loud and
beautifully as ever you heard from the throat of true
game in the cock-pit; after which I vanished, as every
true ghost is in duty bound, in a flame of blue fire and
rosin.
Really, I think it was time, replied Andre, while
Balcarras and the 'squire laughed heartily.
The thing was relished mightily, I assure you,
continued the major, and when I appeared again
they were all on tiptoe to hear me. I began
`I am thy father's spirit;'
and by the thunders of applause, concluded I gave
general
satisfaction, until I came to the line
`But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air'
where I followed Hamlet's advice, and literally suited
the action to the word, for I stalked about the stage,
with my head raised, like a pig in a storm, snuffing the
air from the four points of the compass. The whole
house was delighted!
That was certainly what the players call striking
out a new reading, observed Balcarras.
I thought so, continued M`Druid, and so I
went on with even greater spirit, until the poor Ghost
cries out
`O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!'
I had no sooner delivered this line, than a tall
Ulsterman
,
with a brogue as thick as my leg, stood up in the
pit, and cried aloud
By Saint Patrick, and you may say that with a safe
conscience.
Well, what effect had this?
The laugh was rather against me for a time, but
my friends made so much noise in applauding that
they soon obtained silence, and I went on peaceably
to the end of the speech, then making three polite bows
to Hamlet, as became the ghost of a king, I
concluded
`Adieu, adieu, adieu, remember me.'
The tall Ulsterman stood up again, and cried`Good
bye to ye, and thank ye for going.' I shall never
forget
the rough brogue of the bogtrotter.
Well, what ensued?
A shower of rotten oranges and other filth from all
parts of the house, replied the major, gravely.
And you of course decamped?
No, by my hilts, I withstood it like a soldier, until
I found it too much for flesh and blood to bear, and
then I stalked off and quietly gave up the Ghostand
thus ended my theatrical career.
7*
You have mistaken your forte, major, replied
Andre, and had better engage for the low comedy
line, for if you were so successful in creating a laugh
in a terrific part, in comedy you would certainly be
irresistible.
We shall not fall out about parts, Mr. Manager,
though it has been the bone of contention among
actors
from time immemorial. Comedy or tragedy, it
will be all one to Phelim M`Druid, for the player
should make the part, and not the part the player.
Still, you will find that I am your man for the heavy
business.
I am of opinion, replied Balcarras, smiling, that
you will play the heavy business, no matter what walk
of the drama you may attempt.
Let me alone for giving them something
substantial
,
replied the major, who did not appear to
understand
the Scotchman's sarcasm. They shall get
none of your whip-sillabub from me, but a plain
wholesome
dish, where they may cut and come again.
Miss Buckley was of opinion that the major's
representation
of the Ghost was not true to nature, and
that they did these things in a widely different style
among the Romans and Athenians, but the major
contended
,
that as few people were so fortunate as to have
seen a ghost, and as they had discontinued their visits
to this sphere entirely of late years, an actor was at
liberty to exercise his own imagination in personating
one, and no matter how fanciful his conception of the
part, it would be absurd to pronounce it untrue to
nature
,
as he was just as capable of judging of the
nature
of a ghost as his most sagacious critic. Miss
Buckley now entered into a critical examination of the
character of Hamlet, but as a whole library has already
been written upon this subject, and no doubt, in the
course of time another will be produced, we shall spare
the reader the trouble of either perusing or passing
over the remarks of our blue stocking, though they
were as much to the purpose as most that has been
said by her predecessors or followers.
Major Andre succeeded in organizing his corps of
Thespians, of which he and Delancey were the scene
painters, and they decorated the stage with taste, but
as their dramatic library was rather circumscribed, they
were obliged to advertise in the tory press for copies
of the popular dramas of the day. Eventually all
difficulties
were surmounted, and they figured away much
to their own satisfaction and the edification of all loyal
subjects in the good city of Penn, who felt charitably
disposed towards the widows and orphans of those who
had fallen in battle. The young officers were
pronounced
far more successful in the fictitious scenes,
than in the eventful drama of real life which at that
time engrossed their attention, but whether or not
M`Druid performed the heavy business we have been
unable to ascertain, after the most patient and laborious
research. Neither have we been so fortunate as to
meet with any record of the names of this corps, which
could not fail to prove an interesting document in these
days of antiquarian research, when it is deemed
important
to inform posterity who it was wore the first
silk stockings, and who the last cocked hat in our
favoured
city. We were once introduced to an old lady
who, it was said, was a reigning toast of the day, and
present at all the entertainments, but on interrogating
her, she protested that she was too young at the time
to remember any thing of the matter, but as the old
lady was married to her third husband a few days
after, there was no difficulty in accounting for her
absence
of memory. Several other sources of information
were applied to with similar success, when we
relinquished
the pursuit in despair, more fully convinced
than ever that the path to useful knowledge is indeed
a rugged and an arduous one. If such a matter as this
required so much trouble to produce nothing at last,
what must not the philosophical Bacon or the
antiquarian
Watson have encountered in opening their mines
of learning to the world!
While this pious attempt to cheat Satan at his own
game, and travel to heaven as it were through his
favourite
hothouse, the stage, was in progress, the
soldiers
of the garrison were committing daily
depredations
on the inhabitants of the vicinity, and leaving the
marks of fire and sword wherever they appeared.
Neutrality and passiveness were no plea for
protection
.
It was sufficient cause for savage brutality and
wanton devastation, that the inoffensive victim resided
on the soil that the invader came to pillage. The
husbandman
at midnight was dragged from his bed, his
house plundered and fired, his cattle driven away, and
his barn containing all his earthly store, reduced to
ashes in the sight of his terrified and houseless family.
This is no solitary picture, for the whole district was
for years after dotted and disfigured with vestiges of
this sort, that tended to kindle in the bosoms of their
sons the animosity that the sufferers carried to their
graves. And yet this was the policy adopted
throughout
,
in order to reduce the colonies to subjection. They
were to be scourged into bondage, without any regard
being paid to their grievances, for the little aristocratic
isle has ever been disposed to arrogate to itself a
superiority
over the rest of the world, and to view her
colonies
,
whence she draws the nourishment that sustains
her, in the light of plantations worked by slaves, and
she will continue to do so until they have, one after
another, taught her to consider them in the light of
free and independent states. John Bull was ever a
hard landlord, disposed to exact the whole product of
the soil for rent, which if not paid on the day it became
due, he would immediately distrain and bluster most
terribly; now this is very bad policy on the part of
master Bull, inasmuch as his title to most of his farms
is exceedingly questionable, and his tenants may be
driven by oppression to contest his right to exact any
rent at all. We have been wandering; it is time to
return.
CHAPTER VI.
Attend to my discourse, and by the rules
Of the
duello
I shall clearly prove
He is a base bezonian, and beneath
The notice of a cavalier who wears
His cloak o' the court fashion.
The Sultan
.
Agatha
entered the parlour just as her aunt finished
her dissertation on the character of Hamlet, by which
she lost exactly as much as you have, most courteous
reader, by our omitting to transfer her remarks to our
pages. This, we admit, was an inexcusable piece of
neglect on our part, of which Miss Buckley with reason
may complain, for by some unaccountable chance, on
this occasion she spoke to the purpose, and as we have
made her talk so widely of the mark throughout this
veracious history, it is but justice that we should
notice
whenever she came near the thing she aimed at.
But unfortunately it is the prevailing fault with
historians
to seize with avidity upon the most glaring
features, which they ingeniously distort and exaggerate,
while the more amiable but less striking traits are
frequently
passed over unnoticed, or if noticed, but slightly
touched upon. A thousand minuti go to the formation
of a character, without a knowledge of which it is
impossible
to be understood, and yet the historian will
narrate a few of the most prominent events of a man's
life, distort them that he may form his own corollary,
and then leave the reader to decide upon the force of
his logic. And such is history! As well might a
painter daub an eye or a nose upon a piece of canvass,
and palm it on you for a finished and striking likeness,
in spite of your protest against the possibility of the
man having no other feature than an eye or a nose in
his countenance. But we are wandering again.
On the appearance of Agatha the 'squire revived the
subject of Jurian's conduct, which he discussed with
more prejudice than justice, and Miss Buckley acted
as junior counsel against the party arraigned. She
gave her opinion at large, and touched upon as many
subjects as a young advocate in making his maiden
speech, which is usually a succinct history of the world
from the days of Adam, and a little farther back. She
spoke much and learnedly, for it is said to be cakes
and ale to ladies of a certain, or rather an uncertain
age, to sit in judgment upon character, and upon the
slightest trail they will follow like a setter, knowing as
little as he does the nature of the game pursued, and
at times mistaking a stone for a bird. Still it is very
pretty pastime, and your true sportsman never fails to
bring down the object aimed at, though he should shoot
as wide of the mark as Bob Acres himself, who is
notorious
for a long shot. Miss Buckley continued her
declamation until she had nearly exhausted all the
words to be found in Webster's new dictionary, and
had began to coin others, most of which that able
philologist has since introduced, when the 'squire's
patience was wrought to the point of explosion, and
he hinted at the propriety of postponing the balance
until a future occasion.
Agatha was quick to perceive the bearing of their
remarks, and expostulated against the injustice of
condemning
a man unheard. She reminded them that the
evidence produced was on one side only, that Jurian
would doubtless furnish a different version of the story,
and that common charity required them to suspend
their opinion until such time as all the facts might be
laid before them.
But do not actions speak more plainly than words?
demanded Balcarras.
They sometimes make a more lasting impression,
replied Agatha, smiling, as you, my lord, no doubt
can testify. But still they may be as equivocal as
words.
But not in the present instance, replied Balcarras.
There is, unfortunately for the side you have espoused,
not even a loop to hang a doubt upon. He has broken
his faith, employed a base artifice to escape from
confinement
,
and avoid giving honourable satisfaction to
the man he had injured, and yet such conduct can find
an advocate in one whose zeal almost makes me envy
such a state of degradation.
Agatha blushed slightly at the compliment of the
Scot, and replied
Should your lordship ever attain the state you
envy, I fear you would prize less highly the zeal of
your advocate, for my ingenuity would avail but little
before judges, who are disposed to decide contrary to
the evidence of their own senses.
Miss Morton surely cannot accuse me of such
injustice
?
You have thus far been but a witness, my lord; I
have heard your testimony, but not your decision,
which I confess I am curious to learn.
The circumstances of the case can lead but to one
conclusion, replied Balcarras.
And that is, my lord
That he avoided the meeting from cowardice, or
if you consider the term too harsh, call it prudential
motives.
I fear, replied Agatha, with an arch smile on her
lipsI fear all the evidence is not before the court,
or we should have a different decision. I must
therefore
move in arrest of judgment, and proceed to cross
examine the colonel. Balcarras betrayed uneasiness,
for he had more than once experienced the severity of
her sarcasm.
What does the giddy girl mean? demanded the
'squire.
Never bother yourself about the meaning, sir,
exclaimed M`Druid, whose eyes had been for some
time fixed in admiration on the animated countenance
of Agatha. Only let her speak, and I care not if she
talk in Hebrew.
Exceedingly gallant, major, indeed, replied Agatha.
Cato the censor could not have been more severe,
said the spinster.
By my hilts, you misunderstand what I would be
at. There is, to my ear, so much music in woman's
voice, that I would as soon think of finding fault with
an Italian air because I could not comprehend the
words of the song, as to criticise her meaning. There
is no sound in nature half so sweet, and it may be
termed the universal tongue, for it is understood
throughout the world, no matter to what language the
words may belong.
Machiavel himself, exclaimed the spinster, could
not have escaped from your dilemma more adroitly.
Still, major, it appears that you care more for
sound than sense? continued Agatha, and if that
be the case, you doubtless hold a kettle-drum in higher
esteem than a woman's voice, notwithstanding your
pretended admiration.
Would not the town-clock be a better comparison?
said Balcarras.
And why the town-clock, colonel?
For it has the faculty of circulting information,
without being sensible of what it publishes to the
world. He affected to smile, but instead of concealing,
it only betrayed the bitterness of spirit in which the
remark was made.
The days of sir Charles Grandison are over,
exclaimed
Miss Buckley.
Diogenes in his tub was a courtier to him, said
M`Druid, and, by my hilts, he does not deserve to
stand in the sunshine of a woman's smile until he
recants
his libel.
Still his comparison fails, replied Agatha, for
the clock speaks but once in an hour, and where will
you find a woman of that description?
It fails in another respect, replied Balcarras,
forcing a smile, the clock speaks seldom, but always
to the purpose.
The savage! a true descendant of the ancient
Picts, muttered Miss Buckley, and her veneration for
the titled man fell fifty per cent. at least.
I will imitate the clock, colonel, replied Agatha,
and for once speak to the purpose; so come into court
and let us proceed with your examination. Now, upon
the affidavit you have made, you know of no reason
why Jurian Hartfield should not be branded with the
name of coward? Balcarras hesitated, and the old
'squire said
What means this trifling, you little puss?
Trifling, sir? I was never more serious in all my
life, and I expect a serious answer to my question.
You have espoused a desperate cause, replied the
old man, and as the weight of testimony is against
you, you may as well abandon it in despair.
No, sir, I contend that all the testimony has not
yet been heard, and that it is contrary to every
principle
of justice to go on to trial in the absence of the
defendant.
That is certainly the law of the present day, said
the spinster, though it was different among the
Greeks and Romans.
But will he return, demanded Balcarras, and
refute the charges?
If he does not, replied Miss Buckley, he will
VOL. II.8
forfeit his recognisance, and in that case you can
proceed
against the bail.
Still you evade my question, said Agatha to
Balcarras.
Not intentionally, I assure you, replied the earl,
for I know of nothing to alter the opinion created by
his conduct in the present instance.
Since your memory is so treacherous, my lord, I
must bring a dumb witness into court.
A dumb witness!
Ay, but one, as my good aunt would say, that will
speak as eloquently without a tongue as Cicero or
Demosthenes. Saying which she hastily left the
room.
There are certainly no orators of the present day
to be compared to them, said the spinster.
What can the little witch mean? exclaimed her
father.
By my hilts, exclaimed M`Druid, she is too
deep for my line, but she speaks most musically, and
that's sufficient for me.
But I fear, Balcarras, not as much to the purpose
as the town-clock, said the 'squire, jocularly.
She has long been preparing to strike, replied
the earl, forcing a smile, which only betrayed that he
was not as much at ease as he wished to appear.
And, zounds, she has armed herself for the blow,
exclaimed the squire, for here comes the jade with
her dumb witness. Agatha entered, as he spoke, with
a drawn sword in her hand, and Balcarras with
difficulty
concealed his confusion as she approached him,
and said
This, I believe, is your sword, my lord, as your
name is on the hilt. I need not remind you how you
lost it nor where it was found, but pray wear it for my
sake, and if it does not eventually work a change in
your opinion of Jurian, henceforth I discard all faith in
magic charms and spells.
Zounds, child, is the sword bewitched?
exclaimed
the 'squire.
I believe it was, sir, on one occasion. What say
you, colonel? replied Agatha, with provoking
archness
.
He stammered a reply, which was happily
interrupted
by Miss Buckley.
Orlando, we are told, fought with an enchanted
sword, but we do not meet with any thing of the kind
in modern times.
But your dumb witness, said the 'squire, which
was to speak as eloquently as Cicero, says nothing
after all. When, pray, is it to begin?
You are mistaken, sir, replied Agatha, laughing.
It has already held a long colloquy with the colonel;
true, it was carried on in a whisper, but my ears were
quick enough to overhear it.
How delightfully she prattles, exclaimed M`Druid,
who was lounging on the sofa, his jovial face
enlightened
with benevolence, there is more music in her
tongue, than in the harp of old Carolan the bard. It
is strange how widely men will differ in their opinions,
for Balcarras thought that the voice of Xantippe, when
strained to the highest pitch, must have been the very
soul of melody, compared to the discord that
proceeded
from the pretty lips of Agatha.
Come, child, give us the substance of this
dialogue
,
exclaimed the 'squire, for we must have no
whispering in company.
It said, colonel, continued Agatha, that a
woman
can never keep a secret, so you must pardon me
if I afford another instance of the truth of the adage.
Balcarras bowed haughtily, and Agatha continued
Having the colonel's consent, I need not hesitate.
Then, sir, in the first place the sword saluted the
colonel
,
and said, `I am very happy in being restored to
you, sir, for I thought we were parted forever.' To
which the colonel replied, `I was in hopes never to
have seen you again, for I have no faith in you. You
could not possibly have timed your visit worse, and
instead of being here, I wish you were at the bottom
of Darby creek, with all my heart.'
You have sharp ears, indeed, girl, if you have
heard all that, said the 'squire.
Rather a fruitful imagination, sir, than quickness
of hearing, responded Balcarras, whose ever-ready
smile but ill concealed his rising indignation.
Fact, my lord, fact, exclaimed Agatha, every
syllable, besides much more that I heard as distinctly.
Let us have the balance, by all means, said
M`Druid.
The sword then demanded of the colonel whether
he was a brave man, continued Agatha, to which
he replied, with some temper, `who dare question it?'
`Not I,' says the sword, `but for a brave man,
methinks
you have suffered an old and trusty friend to be
treated rather cavalierly by one whom you pronounced
a coward.'
The confusion of Balcarras became more apparent,
for he found himself in that awkward situation in which
common courtesy required him to affect good humour,
while his blood boiled with indignation. As well might
you command a lobster to keep cool while his shell is
turning `from black to red.'
Well, niece, how did this singular dialogue
terminate
?
demanded Miss Buckley, who perceiving the
uneasiness of Balcarras, notwithstanding the cloak he
had thrown over his feelings, thought it a favourable
opportunity to be revenged on him for the sarcasm he
had cast upon the sex. Since knight errants have
disappeared
,
the greatest stickler for the supremacy of
woman is your virgin of sixty-five.
Agatha continued
The sword, dear aunt, replied in your own
language
,
and reminded the colonel that Octavius Csar
acquired more honour for having conquered Brutus,
than from any action of his after life.
The sword speaks in parables; I do not
understand
the reply, said the spinster.
It is sufficient that the colonel does, replied
Agatha. Octavius was considered a weak man, and
Brutus himself pronounced him such, but after the
battle of Phillippi, Brutus was silenced and his laurels
were transferred to the brow of Csar.
Brutus and Csar! exclaimed the 'squire, this,
Becky, is all your doings; I shall have another pedant
in petticoats, and curse me if I shall understand a word
that is spoken under my roof. What do you mean,
you little playful fawn you, what do you mean?
I must leave his lordship to explain, replied
Agatha, smiling, and left the room. She had sustained
the foregoing conversation with a degree of archness
and levity that ill accorded with her feelings, for
notwithstanding
the constant succession of amusements
that the gallantry of the officers afforded, and the
novelty
of the scene to our heroine, it was impossible for
her to disengage her mind from a sense of the danger
in which the companion of her childhood was involved.
It lay like a poisonous mineral at the very fountain of
thought, and corrupted the whole stream. The delicate
hue of her cheeks had faded away, and her bright eyes
no longer sparkled with their wonted animation. Still
she was calm. There was no outward display of grief,
but notwithstanding her struggle to appear as cheerful
as ever, it was impossible to deceive her anxious and
doating father. He perceived that both her mind and
frame had undergone a fearful change, and knowing
that the most delicate and beautiful of Nature's works
fade soonest, as if the portion of heavenly essence with
which they are endued disqualified them for a
prolonged
existence in this world, he experienced all the
solicitude
of a father whose only hope is suspended by a
spider's web, and who is alarmed at every breath of air
that may agitate the fragile strand.
Still Agatha at times recovered her natural spirits,
8*
and her voice would break forth as joyously as the
notes of the blue-bird when he heralds the approach of
spring; the well known sound was as a medicine to the
heart of her father, and she in her filial piety intended
it as such, but like the notes of a bird in the wilderness,
it cheered the solitude for a moment, but when it died
away, the gloom again prevailed unchanged.
The unrestrained intimacy of Balcarras in Mr.
Morton's
family had tended to increase the ardour of his
passion for Agatha, which was heightened as he
became
more fully persuaded of its utter hopelessness.
Love, though pictured as a weak and timid child,
glories
in the rocking of the storm, and gathers vigour
while encountering difficulties. Balcarras was not
aware of the extent of his passion until Agatha's
preference
for another, and the apparent improbability of
estranging her feelings, became too manifest to be
questioned. He trusted that the disgrace that had
attached itself to the character of Jurian would operate
in his own favour, but in this he was disappointed, for
so far from weakening it appeared to strengthen her
devotion, and every argument that he adduced to
detract
from the reputation of his rival, recoiled upon
himself, until he was finally discomfited with his own
weapons. The railery of Agatha was keenly felt. His
proud spirit was mortified at being exposed to ridicule
before his companions, and his chagrin was increased
at the idea of having established his rival's character
for bravery by the very means by which he had hoped
to prove him a coward.
It is no easy task to turn a stream from its original
channel, and when a man's thoughts have been
directed
for months together towards one object, it is not a
slight obstruction that will change their course, but like
the brook it appears as if obstacles only tended to
increase
the force of the current. It was a part of the
creed of Balcarras, that no simple girl in the colonies
would be able to withstand a gallant of his address,
with a ribbon in his button-hole, and a title to his name,
which proved conclusively that he had a grandfather
before him, but the earl had now begun to question the
correctness of this belief, though he could not
comprehend
the reason of things being ordered so differently
in the new world from what they are in the old. He
ultimately, however, placed it to the score of ignorance,
and deplored the state of society that refused to pay
him the homage to which he considered himself entitled
by prescriptive right. The homely proverb, that `every
tub must stand on its own bottom,' he conceived was
fraught with rank injustice, as it deprived him of an
unquestionable part of his birthright, the respect and
admiration of the world, and he had been startled some
time before at this singular departure from established
principles, by the remark of a rough Virginia captain
who had been taken prisoner at Germantown. Several
of the scions of nobility were cutting their swells in the
presence of our honest Virginian, and the earl
contended
that the public consideration to which a
nobleman's
progenitors were entitled, was an indefeasible
part of the inheritance of the representative of the
family honours, and no matter how weak or rotten the
scion might be, his influence was not to be affected,
provided the parent stock was a good one. Our
Virginian
repliedWe hold a different doctrine here.
When weeds and nettles spring from the root of the
prostrate oak, we treat them as weeds and nettles.
Among us every man must hoe his own row, and he
must do it well too, or he will get devilish little corn, I
promise you. He need not expect a second crop,
because
his father happened to hoe it before him.
Balcarras, on leaving Mr. Morton's house,
determined
that Agatha should constitute a part of his
travelling
equipage, in spite of the many obstacles that
presented themselves. His pride had been excited by
her sarcasm, and his passion inflamed by the difficulties
he had to encounter. But by what means could he
accomplish his desires! It was evident that she would
never reciprocate his love as long as Jurian was able
to maintain his present position. He had attempted to
hurl him down, and had suffered a mortifying defeat;
still there were other means untried, from which a
miracle alone could save the young man. He had sold
himself to the enemies of his country, and if this fact
were made known, he would be obliged to fly the land
of his birth, or undergo an ignominious death, in either
case the field would be left open to our magnanimous
earl. The plot is a good plot, thought Balcarras, but
who is there to put it in execution? He was not long
in casting about to find a suitable instrument, for he
had no sooner resolved upon the step than Paul Gordon
entered his lodgings to inquire for young Morton. The
subject was proposed, and a well filled purse was
produced
to settle any abstract points that might arise in
the mind of honest Paul, but none presented
themselves
,
for the earl was not more anxious for the
removal
of Jurian than was Gordon himself, as he hoped
such a result might advance his views with Miriam.
He accordingly pocketed the purse, which he
considered
being handsomely paid for doing his own
business
,
and assured the earl, with an oath, that `he
would blow the young rebel out of water before he was
many days older.' Paul always swore roundly when
he wished to be emphatic, and to impress his hearers
with a due sense of his importance. Preliminaries
being settled, our hero of the stirrup cocked his hat
upon his head in a manner that showed that he was on
very good terms with himself, and stalked out of the
room perfectly satisfied with the unexpected result of
his visit.
CHAPTER VII.
All the works
Are blown
in fumo
, every glass is burst,
Furnace and all rent down! as if a bolt
Of thunder had been driven through the house.
Retorts, receivers, pelicans, bolt-heads
All struck in shivers!
The Alchemist
.
The
American forces had not been long established
in their winter quarters at Valley Forge, when famine
appeared among them, and nearly occasioned the entire
dissolution of the army. In the depth of an unusually
inclement winter, surrounded by a waste of snow,
poorly sheltered from the elements, insufficiently clad,
and worse fed, it is not to be wondered at that
discontent
prevailed, from officers of high grade down to the
meanest subaltern. To add to their sufferings, sickness
had made greater ravages in their ranks than the sword
of the enemy. Their hospitals were filled with the
dead and the dying, and those who were required to
perform duty, moved like shadows through the
garrison
,
disease upon their cheeks, and their emaciated
bodies shivering as though every blast of wind would
congeal the nearly exhausted fountain of life, and as
they turned their eyes from the sickening scene, they
beheld little to revive and console the drooping spirit,
for nature herself was in a state of desolation. A
succession
of reverses had rendered almost hopeless the
cause in which they had embarked their fortunes, and
among the master spirits there were to be found those,
whose minds, fired by ambition and embittered by envy,
instead of endeavouring to allay the prevailing
discontent
,
they promoted it to the extent of their power, and
thus committed a suicidal act upon their fair fame.
It has been stated that the encampment was built
upon the plan of a regular city, and that the huts were
constructed with logs, the interstices between which
were filled with clay and mortar. Captain Swain and
his friend M`Crea were quartered together, and in the
rear of the cabin the surgeon had erected another, which
he fitted up as a laboratory, where he made his
philosophical
experiments towards the discovery of the arcanum
of prolonging human life, though hourly called upon to
visit
death's doings. This cabin was strewed with crucibles,
retorts, receivers, and curiously constructed air-pumps,
which he had the temerity to experiment upon himself,
when at a loss for a patient possessed of a greater share
of courage and credulity than common sense.
Countless
were the decoctions that he tasted, various were the
powders that he formed from the whole pharmacopia
of nature, and he withstood the discharge of his
electrical
battery like a true hero, until his frame had
wasted away to such a degree that he bore a more
striking resemblance to the anatomy suspended in the
case behind the door of his cabin than to a being of
this world. Truly has it been said that the hill of science
is hard to climb. It was the wonder of all how he
managed
to sustain life in a place where death was daily
revelling, and the miracle was only to be accounted for
by presuming that the King of Terrors, as he took his
rounds, seeing him so often beside the sick bed of a
victim, mistook him for one of his own disciples
labouring
in his vocation, and accordingly passed him by
without throwing his unerring dart.
A council had been called by the
commander-in-chief
in order to adopt measures for the immediate
relief
of the famishing army. Captain Swain, as he
returned from head-quarters, where he had been to
learn the decision of the council, was met by Jurian on
a similar errand.
What have you learnt, sir; what is the result of
their deliberations? demanded Jurian.
It is said that general Howe has sent a strong
detachment
to forage in the islands of the Delaware, and
the neighbourhood of Chester and Darby, replied the
captain.
And of course a detachment must be sent in that
direction to prevent it, replied the other. Well,
thank Providence, I am in health and ready for the
expedition
.
So it was at first determined, but your patriotism
will not be put to the test in that way, said the captain.
How so?
Because we are on the verge of starvation, and
instead of cutting off the supplies of the enemy, it is
necessary that our own magazines be first replenished,
for on examination it appears that they do not contain
a single day's provisions.
Great heavens! this will increase the discontent
which already prevails to a fearful extent throughout the
garrison.
I dread the consequences, replied captain Swain,
for unfortunately we have those among us who care
not what injury they do the cause, provided they can
blemish the name of Washington, and such are already
busy among the suffering soldiery.
What measures have been adopted in this
emergency
?
Foraging parties are to be despatched forthwith to
seize provisions to satisfy the present wants of the
army.
The measure is a harsh one, and cannot fail to be
unpopular.
True; but the exigencies of our situation compel
us to this step, and it is far better to commit this
apparent
injustice, than to suffer the army to be dissolved,
upon which depends the emancipation of our country.
As they moved along the narrow alley between the
huts, the doors of many of which were thrown open to
admit the feeble rays of the sun, their hearts sickened
as they heard the complaints of the half clothed and
emaciated inmates. The murmurs were loud, nor was
there any disposition to conceal the general discontent
that prevailed. Those who were sick offered up their
prayers for health, that they might quit the scene of
famine, while those who enjoyed comparative strength
threatened not to await the expiration of their term of
service, fearful of being speedily reduced to the
condition
of their comrades. In the midst of these
expressions
of discontent, a gaunt figure, seated at the door
of one of the cabins, was labouring hard to discipline
a most unharmonious voice to the movements of one of
those fine old continental airs, the effects of which are
only surpassed by the fabulous account of the influence
of the songs of the Thracian poet. True, they did not
make trees and rocks join in the mystic mazes of the
dance, but then they infused a new spirit into the bosom
of the most insensible, and awakened feelings that
otherwise might have slumbered through life. Our
vocalist began in a voice that might have been heard
half over the camp, for he evidently despised those
delicate touches that throw the soul of a modern
amateur
into ecstasies.
Come all ye brave Americans whom liberty inspires,
Whose hearts are warm with all the zeal our country's cause
requires,
Let not defeat dishearten you, but now your metal show,
And join our gallant Washington against the haughty foe.
No meat, no soldier, is my maxim, exclaimed
corporal Drone, who was shivering in the hut, with no
other covering than his tattered rifle shirt, and you
may preach patriotism until you are hoarse, but you
will be bothered, I am thinking, to keep even an army
of shadows together without food.
The singer continued, without making any reply, or
even noticing the interruption
Although upon Long Island, the foe a victory won,
Although fort Constitution fell, fort Lee and Washington;
Remember they at Brunswick, boys, and Princeton felt the
blow;
Our troops were not discouraged there, but bravely fought the
foe.
Now where's the use, sergeant Talman, in
bragging
of our victories? continued the corporal. Hang
me if I would give an Indian blanket, at this present
speaking, for the honour of the whole of them. The
sergeant was too intent upon his song to be diverted
from it by the remarks of the corporal.
The third of January, boys, the morning being clear,
Our troops attacked the regulars near Princeton we do hear.
Within a mile of Princeton, boys, the battle it begun,
And many a haughty Briton fell before the fight was done.
A better fate than to live and be famished in such
a garrison as this, muttered the corporal. Honest
Mauns did not even turn his head towards the
malcontent
,
but continued
Th' invaders were dispersed, in fright they ran away;
They ran across the country, boys, like sheep in great dismay;
Loud crying out, `O! hide us, O! hide us, hide us do,
For the rebels they'll devour us, so hotly they pursue.'
Then let us not despair, though we march to meet our graves,
Since we can die as freemen, we'll never live as slaves;
And should kind heaven protect us, and victory crown the day,
We'll cheer our fallen heroes with many a loud huzza!
Your huzza will be rather a feeble one, unless you
get something to eat speedily, replied the corporal;
VOL. II.9
but Mauns proved that his lungs were still in good
condition
,
by shouting
Huzza! huzza!
We'll cheer our fallen heroes with many a loud huzza!
[2]
[2]
I have taken a few liberties with this song, which was a
popular one during the Revolution. I am ignorant of the author's
name, and know not whether the song itself is to be found in
print, as I received it from the lips of an old gentleman who
has treasured it in his memory from childhood, and sings it
every fourth of July in the good old style of honest Talman.
There is one of the true descendants of Sven's
army, said captain Swain, pointing at Talman. As he
finished his song, a soldier approached the cabin,
without
stockings on, and little other covering than a
blanket
thrown over his soldiers.
Here comes one, let us see whether you can get
him to join in your huzzaing, said the corporal.
That he will, replied Mauns, as long as his
voice holds out, and when that fails, he will wave his
hand as a token that his heart is in the right place.
I wish I had a token that my bowels were in the
right place, replied the corporal, for by their
growling
I should conclude they could not be in a worse one
than they are at present.
Your mouth is never silent but when it is filled,
said the captain, approaching.
It is very hard, captain, replied Drone, after all
my services at Brandywine, Paoli, and at Germantown,
to find that I am not a crust of bread the better. I am
willing to fight for my country, but curse me if I can
starve for it.
Is your condition worse than that of many
thousands
?
No sir, nor can I discover that my burden is the
lighter for their sharing in it. I came to fight with the
foe, and not with famine.
Famine drove you to the camp, corporal, replied
the captain, and we shall be the gainer if she hunts
you from it again; then turning to the new comer, he
demanded what he wanted.
I have been ordered on duty, sir, and having no
coat, have come to borrow the sergeant's.
Mauns stripped off his coat in silence, and handing
it to the soldier, received his blanket in return, which
he wrapped round his gaunt figure, and resumed his
seat.
You are a stout fellow, said the captain, and I
am glad to see that you keep up your spirits.
How the devil he manages it, muttered the
corporal
,
is a mystery to me, for we have not had a drop
of rum since Friday.
Silence, thou eternal raven, cried the captain.
Nor bread for three days, continued the corporal,
and that was as dry and mouldy as the bones of my
grandfather.
I wish the crust had been hard enough to choke
you, replied Mauns.
Nor meat since yesterday morning, continued the
pertinacious corporal. Our commissaries must think
that we have the stomachs of Nebuchadnezzar, and
can subsist on hay, for we are in a fair way to give the
experiment a trial before the grass grows.
Thou mutinous rascal, stop thy clamorous throat,
or I shall do it for you, cried the captain.
I wish you would, provided you do it with a piece
of bread and beef, responded Drone. The captain
turned to the sentinel, who stood listening in silence
You hear this discontented fellow, who no doubt
has come among us because he could not subsist
elsewhere
.
There are, I fear, too many of the same
description
in the camp, but do not suffer their complaints
to poison your mind, my brave fellow. True, this is a
trying hour, but all will be well in a few days; only
keep up your courage.
Yesterday, at noon, sir, I stood sentinel at head
quarters, replied the soldier.
And what did you see there?
The general at his dinner. The meat was as
coarse as that in my own cabin, and yet he ate it with
appetite, and returned thanks when he was done. I
have thought of it ever since, and damn me if I desert
him as long as there is as much as a corporal's guard
remaining.
The soldier withdrew, and the corporal continued
muttering, until sergeant Talman rose from his seat,
and without opening his lips, deliberately took him by
the collar, and leading him to the door of the hut,
shoved him out of it, and then resumed his seat as
composedly as if nothing had occurred. Drone retired
muttering sedition, until he came to a hut in which
several malcontents were assembled, which he entered,
and added fuel to the fire that every hour threatened to
burst out with irrepressible fury.
Sergeant Talman was possessed of astonishing
equanimity
of temper; he was seldom disconcerted, and he
would occasionally remark that a man can always attend
to business with greater coolness and comfort to
himself
when he is not in a passion, and for his part he
could never discover the advantage in getting out of
humour. True, there is a tradition that on one
occasion
he swore a tremendous Swedish oath, but what
the oath was no one remembers, and few understood
it at the time, but all agree that the sergeant's temper
was somewhat ruffled. The occasion was briefly this:
he had a favourite pipe, with a curiously fashioned
meerschaum bowl, as big as a tea-cup, which had
descended
to him from his great grandfather, who smoked
it throughout the memorable siege of fort Casimer, and
Mauns set great store by it on this account. Jurian,
who, when a youngster, was fond of playing his pranks
upon the honest Swede, who took the roughest in good
part, for he loved the boy, one day got possession of
this relic of antiquity, while Mauns was taking an
afternoon
nap, and filled the bowl with gunpowder. Mauns
was prone to gossip at the village inn with Aoki Shell,
at that period celebrated for his long shot on the
Schuylkill
,
and no sooner did he awake, than taking his pipe,
he repaired to the inn to hear the news, and become
as philosophical as the fumes of the `devil's weed'
could make him. A good story was broached, to
which Mauns listened with deep interest, and being a
man of few words, he usually called in the aid of his
pipe to supply an occasional hiatus in the conversation,
and substituted smoke for wind. It is no uncommon
occurrence to see two Dutchmen converse for hours
together by means of their pipes alone, and what is
more astonishing, provided they are good smokers, they
may rise quite as much edified as if their tongues had
been running like mill clappers the whole time.
Mauns never relished a long story so much as when
he had a meerschaum in his mouth; accordingly Aoki,
who was a very Arab in the way of fiction, no sooner
commenced, than our worthy began to fix his pipe, and
called for a coal of fire, aware that Aoki's story was
entitled to a patient hearing, and thus prepared he
could have set out the Arabian Nights without
interruption
,
other than that which might be occasioned by
knocking the ashes from his pipe, and replenishing it
with tobacco.
The fire being brought, and Talman having leisurely
examined his pipe, and finding it well filled with
mundungus
,
lighted it, and took his seat in silence among
the company assembled beneath the shade of the old
elm tree in front of the inn, and it must be confessed
he was the most philosophical looking character
present
.
Jurian was also a looker on, and vastly did he
admire the gravity of the Swede, which increased in
proportion to the interest of Aoki's story, and the
density
of the cloud that encircled the brow of the smoker.
Aoki now began to probe the marrow of his
narrative
,
9*
and while all were listening with intense curiosity,
the interest that honest Mauns felt was indicated alone
by two or three vigorous inspirations through his
friendly tube. Jurian, leaning against the tree, kept
his eyes fixed upon the interminable smoker, in anxious
expectation of the explosion. Aoki continued, and
Mauns smoked more vigorously than before, while the
boy chuckled to himself, `a whiff more like the last will
do the business.' The story drew towards a close, and
Mauns smoked harder and harder, and the boy laughed
outright at his earnestness, when lo! just as Aoki
arrived
at the climax of his tale, his last words were lost
in the alarming explosion. Mauns bolted upright, and
stood aghast, and it is said to have been the only time
that he was ever frightened, or stood erect in his life,
but no sooner did he behold the damage done to his
meerschaum, that had withstood the racket of the Dutch
war, than he ripped out the terrible oath already
referred
to, and which is said to have been the same that
his great grandfather muttered betwixt his teeth when
the fort of the Holy Trinity was surrendered. It had
descended as an heir loom with the pipe to Mauns, and
was only used by him on momentous occasions, but is
said never to have passed his lips after the destruction
of his family relic.
Is that all? methinks I hear the reader exclaim.
Not quite. The boy repaired the honest Swede's
loss with a pipe of tenfold value, but as there was no
traditionary
history attached to it, it required all his
philosophy
to reconcile him to the exchange, and he
discontinued smoking from that day.
But wherein lies the moral?
True, what is a story in the present age without a
moral, when all that is written and all that is done must
tend to the amelioration of mankind? Thrice happy
and disinterested age, in which every man labours to
improve the moral condition of his neighbour, without
feeling the slightest concern for his own. Would not
the work of reform be more effectually promoted if these
philanthropists would begin with themselves, and among
the various institutions for the suppression of vice and
immorality, establish one that might tend to diminish
pride, ambition, hypocrisy, and cant? But to return to
the moral of this episode. It goes to show that boys
were fond of crackers as far back as the middle of the
last century, and that they may not place them in a
tobacco
pipe without doing a mischief; a lesson that the
mischievous rogues should bear in mind when
celebrating
the fourth of July.
Hang such a moral!
Nay, sir, the lesson is calculated to do much good
if properly taken, and though there is not as much
point in it as we find in those admirable productions
issued by the various tract societies, still the subject
might be enlarged upon, and the irreverence of pinning
crackers to the skirts of our sober and staid citizens
illustrated, and in that case who would be bold enough
to take an exception, since there is many an orthodox
sermon wider from the purpose?
Pshaw! get on with your story, exclaims the
critic
.
This digression destroys the unity of your design,
and if tried by the rules of Aristotle
Patience, most learned sir; I will get into the right
track again, and carry you as expeditiously to the place
of destination, as though you were on board a
locomoter
or a steamer.
After sergeant Talman had ejected the corporal,
captain
Swain and Jurian continued their way to their own
quarters, and the sergeant resumed his song. As they
moved along the line of huts, complaints saluted them
at almost every step, and numerous were the sickly and
nearly naked beings that crossed their path.
When they reached their hut, they found that M`Crea
had retired to his laboratory, where indeed he passed
the greater portion of his time in making his
philosophical
experiments. The discovery of the secret of
prolonging animal life now engrossed his studies, for
he deemed it unnecessary to trouble himself about his
theory of gravity, as short rations had made more rapid
strides towards its consummation than all his scientific
researches; and he wisely concluded, that under existing
circumstances it would require all his art to keep body
and soul together.
Jurian, since his return to the American army, had
acquainted his benefactor with the necessity of
rendering
him pecuniary assistance, but pride induced him to
withhold the knowledge of his degradation. Nor did
the benevolent old man press the point; it was sufficient
for him to know that his favourite required his aid, and
he pledged himself to render it, though in consequence
of the state of the times, the task was not an easy one
to accomplish. Still this assurance did not relieve the
mind of Jurian. He did not question that all he asked
would be granted, but there was an isolated thought
that seared his very soul; it clung to him with the
tenacity
of fire; sleeping and waking it burnt on alike,
and there was little prospect of its progress being
arrested
until it had consumed the fountain of life itself.
Captain Swain and our hero had been but a few
minutes
seated in their quarters, and the worthy
descendant
of the lord of Passaiung had scarcely commenced
one of his favourite reminiscences of Swedish history,
when he was interrupted by a violent explosion that
proceeded from the rear of the cabin.
Heavens above us! what noise is that? exclaimed
the captain.
It comes from M`Crea's laboratory, cried the
other, and hastened around the hut to ascertain the cause.
His apprehensions were realized, for volumes of dense
and offensive smoke were issuing from the mouth of the
laboratory of the infatuated chemist. Jurian rushed in,
and lying among the air-pumps and crucibles upon the
earth he found the unfortunate surgeon, and carried
him into the open air, where he made rather a ludicrous
appearance, his foxy wig being singed all over, and his
face bearing the complexion of that of a coal-heaver,
who like the miserable Kehama had been denied the
advantages of water.
A crowd of soldiers was soon attracted to the spot by
the report made by the explosion; among whom was a
young surgeon, who, seeing the situation of the chemist,
opened a vein, and he shortly after came to his senses,
when the first object that presented itself to his view
was the stream of blood flowing from his arm. He
looked wildly around him, while indignation was fast
kindling in his eye.
What idiot has done this? he cried, with a
contemptuous
sneer.
I did it, with the hope of relieving you, said the
young surgeon.
Of murdering me, you mean, cried the enraged
chemist, or how came you to think of letting blood
in such a case as this?
Really, sir, it is the daily and regular practice in
the service, replied the other.
And so, provided I am killed by rule, you conclude
I have no reason to complain.
Killed, sir! you are now perfectly recovered, and
I apprehend
You apprehend! ejaculated M`Crea, eyeing the
young operator with utter contempt; and who the
devil gave you a right to form an opinion of matters
that the accumulated wisdom of ages has not yet
mastered
.
We have come to a pretty pass, indeed, when
geese cackle of science before their backs are freed
from the egg-shell, and children in bibs and tuckers
boldly advance their opinions.
If I have erred, sir, all was done for the best,
replied
the young surgeon.
And so you might have said had you killed me.
But what satisfaction is it to me to know that you inflict
the greatest injury with the best intentions? Then
turning to captain Swain and Jurian, who supported
him, he desired to be conducted to his quarters. As he
was hobbling off, assisted by his friends, he paused, and
looking back upon the unlucky operator said, Young
man, I bear you no malice, but freely forgive you
this act of thoughtlessness, which has shortened my
life at least fifty years.
The group of soldiers stared at each other in
astonishment
,
and considered the chemist mad.
I perceive that the days of the patriarchs have not
yet been stricken from your calendar, replied Jurian.
M`Crea glanced his eyes upon him; there was
something
like a horrid grin upon his countenance, which
might have been intended for a benevolent smile, but
was spoilt in the making by the effect of his burnt wig,
and the smoke which begrimed his wrinkled face from
the chin to the forehead.
A bucket of water was brought into the hut, and the
woful countenance of M`Crea was in some measure
restored to its original complexion, but he remained
silent and evidently chagrined at the unfortunate
termination
of his experiment. Captain Swain shook the
crisped locks from the wig, which now bore some
resemblance
to the back of a sheep too closely shorn,
and replaced it upon the bald head of the surgeon, who
witnessed the operation in silence and with a rueful
countenance.
You appear dejected, said Jurian; I trust you
have not been seriously injured by the accident?
More so than an ordinary observer would imagine,
replied M`Crea, gravely.
In what part are you wounded? I see no external
marks of injury.
In my reputation:I had accomplished the labour
of my lifeI should have satisfied an incredulous world
of the truth of my theory, and have lived forever.
That is rather a longer period than any man need
bargain for, replied Jurian; so you may bless your
stars that the accident has made you a mortal again.
My life might have been limited, but my fame
would have lasted to the end of time, said the chemist,
without raising his eyes. I had consummated the
study of my life; I had brought to a focus the rays of
human knowledge: but the heat was too intense, and
the chemist paused
It all ended in smoke, added the captain.
There was but one grain more of azote to have
been infused into the crucible, continued the chemist,
and the elixir would have been perfected, and my
name descended to after ages with those of Kelly and
Dee.
I don't know as to that, observed the captain,
drily, but it was near being the means of your paying
those worthies a visit rather unexpectedly.
Captain Swain, Horace tells us, `magna movet
stomacho fastidia,' and my stomach already revolts at
thy miserable attempts at humour. Jam desine, jam
desine. Then turning to Jurian, he said, Prithee,
boy, go into my laboratory, and fetch the crucible I had
upon the furnace.
Impossible, sir! It has been fractured into at least
a thousand pieces.
Each of which is worth its weight in gold,
continued
the chemist. It cannot be otherwise, for
transmutation
must have taken place before the unfortunate
explosion.
Perhaps so; but a very expeditious change from
gold to crockery ware must also have succeeded, if
this is a part of the crucible, replied Jurian, picking
from the floor of the hut a piece of the pot, which
having
lodged in M`Crea's apparel, had been carried into
the hut. The chemist seized it eagerly, and after
examining it closely, said
Oh! the blindness of ignorance, and the vanity of all
human projects. One instant longer, and I should have
made the greatest discovery the sun ever shone upon,
and now this little piece of earth is all that remains,
after the labour and study of many years. Saying
which, he carefully put the piece of crucible into his
pocket.
A melancholy reflection, sir, and might have been
made by the bier of Alexander the Great or Julius C
sar, with the same propriety as upon this occasion.
True, boy; even I, in despite of the influence of
science, feel that I am but a piece of earth, and that to
earth I must return; and I fear my day is not far distant,
replied M`Crea, in a solemn voice, his countenance
increasing in longitude as he proceeded. Oh! the
curse of ignorance; why did you suffer that villanous
farrier to bleed me?
What serious injury do you apprehend from the
loss of a few ounces of blood?
It has confounded all my calculations; and now I
am nothing more than a blind mortal like yourself. I
had ascertained precisely the proportion of fluids and
solids in my system, and being possessed of this
knowledge
,
could have kept the machine in motion, until the
burthen of life became too heavy to be supported. But
the study of years has been subverted in an instant by
the thumb lancet of a villanous bleeder. But it is as
well perhaps as it is, since I have lived half a century
without having yet discovered the use of living.
Smile not, courteous reader, at the infatuation of
M`Crea, nor rashly pronounce his pursuit idle when
compared with the various studies of his fellow man.
Look among those whom the world pronounces learned,
and how many do we find spending their lives in
calculating
the degree of heat in a moonbeam, or the
thickness
of a soap-bubble, and when they have discovered
a rule by which the point may be ascertained with
accuracy
,
they rest from their labours, satisfied that they
have lived for the benefit of mankind, and that fame
will inscribe their names in golden and imperishable
characters in the record of science, though learned
alone in such branches as give to wisdom the aspect
of folly.
Alice Grey was now seen slowly passing in front of
the hut, her head bent down, and the hood of her cloak
drawn over her face. Jurian could not conceal his
emotion at this unexpected apparition, and M`Crea
exchanged
glances with captain Swain, that indicated his
surprise at seeing her there. Still no one accosted her,
and she passed on without turning her head either to
the right or left. Her step was slow but unfaltering,
and M`Crea stood at the door of the hut and looked
after her, until she turned into another alley of the
encampment
and disappeared.
What can possibly have brought that woman here,
muttered the surgeon, at this inclement season and
so far from her home? Something of moment must
have occurred.
I hear that her daughter Miriam has deserted her,
replied the captain. M`Crea sighed, and Jurian changed
colour. Unhappy woman, she began life in sorrow,
and in sorrow will it close.
Touch not on that string, exclaimed M`Crea,
or you awaken discord in my bosom more frightful
than the jubilee of fiends. Touch not on that.
Poor creature, she has more than paid the wages
of sin.
The wages of sin, exclaimed M`Crea, would be
as a reward compared to what she has suffered; for the
wages of sin is death, and she has endured through life
pangs more poignant than the agonies of dying. And
still she lives on without a prospect that they will ever
be mitigated in this world. So far from it, that grief
treads upon the heel of grief, and the last is the
greatest
.
Jurian withdrew from the hut, and M`Crea seated
himself, and abruptly changed the conversation to a
subject less painful. Half an hour had scarcely elapsed,
VOL. II.10
when Alice was again seen slowly returning along the
narrow alley. Her mind was still absorbed in her
feelings
,
and she made no reply to the occasional salutations
of the soldiers in passing her, until she came in front
of M`Crea's hut, when she paused, and stood in the
door-way.
Why are you here, Alice; what is it you would
have? demanded M`Crea.
Help for the dying; human aid to keep a wretched
being in this world who is anxious to flee to his God.
Where shall I find the sufferer?
In one of the out-houses belonging to the forge in
the valley, but hasten, or death will have afforded him
that relief which man has denied.
Who is he that has awakened the sympathies of
one more wretched than himself?
A fellow mortal; he needs no stronger claim.
What is his name?
Will charity stand by the couch of a wretch, and
withhold her aid until the name of the sufferer be
spoken? Sorrow and sickness plead more forcibly in
his behalf than the name by which he was known
among the prosperous. Shall I say you will come and
sooth the last hours of the dying?
I am ill myself, Alice, but will procure you
medical
aid.
Medical aid when the soul is bound to its tenement
of clay by a spider's web! replied Alice, in a tone of
bitter derision. You were sent for, and you alone;
and have you the cruelty to deny the last wish of a
dying man?
I will see him.
It is well. I will tell him you are coming, and
though his soul had already spread its wings, those
words would arrest its flight until you come. Farewell.
Stay a few moments, and I will accompany you.
And wherefore should they who have been a curse
to each other in this world, walk side by side? Better
that they be separated as far as the earth can divide
them, when the fascination that led to crime has
vanished
,
and nothing save its bitter consequences
remains
.
Besides, I have that to do which must be done
alone; however, I shall meet you at the place
appointed
,
and partake of the poisoned chalice that we have
prepared together for our own lips.
She turned from the door, and drawing her hood
over her face, pursued her way; and the surgeon, after
getting his apparel into better trim, for it had suffered
wofully in the recent explosion, furnished himself with
a lancet and medicines, and sallied forth to minister to
the dying man.
CHAPTER VIII.
There is no wrong
Like to the breach of wedlock; those injuries
Are writ in marble time shall ne'er rase out.
The hearts of such, if they be once divided,
Will ne'er grow one againsooner you may
Call the spent day, or bid the stream return
That long since slid beside you.
Marmyon's Antiquary
.
When
Jurian left the hut, he withdrew beyond the
limits of the camp, for solitude to the morbid mind is
preferable to society, though it increases the disease
even while it seems to sooth. He sighed for a state of
nature, for it appeared to him that the evils arising from
society, as at present organized, far more than
counterbalance
the benefits conferred. The strong are
upheld
,
while the weak are trampled on, and wealth is
lavished on the prosperous, while the indigent are
suffered
to perish in their want. Presumptuous ignorance
puts wisdom to the blush, and knavery well clad is
noticed cap in hand, while honesty in rags is spurned
and spit upon. Reflections of this nature led him some
distance beyond the line of the encampment, and as he
emerged from a wood, he discovered in the valley
beneath
,
a horseman well mounted, in conversation with
a female, walking slowly beside the horse. A second
look satisfied him that it was Gordon and Alice Grey,
and when he recollected what had transpired when they
last met, no doubt remained that Miriam was the cause
of the present interview. As Jurian approached,
Gordon
descried him, and abruptly breaking off the
conversation
,
clapped spurs to his horse, and disappeared
along the winding of the valley, while Alice entered the
wood, and commenced gathering from beneath the
snow a bundle of the fallen branches, upon which she
was employed when Jurian approached. He accosted
her, and from her manner he did not suppose that she
was yet acquainted with his conduct toward Miriam,
for her answer was mild, and the passions that he
believed
inseparable from her nature were apparently
subdued. Neither look nor motion betrayed what was
passing in her mind.
Who was that parted from you, mother Alice, as I
descended the hill?
One who can feel for the forlorn state of the widow
and the orphan.
And yet a villain!
Of that I know not. Man may be an angel of
light to one, and yet a devil to the rest of the world.
By his acts towards me alone do I adjudge him, and
let others decide upon the evidence within their
knowledge
.
Beware, for I know the man.
Impossible, for there is not that man on earth that
another may say, `I know him.' We know not our own
hearts, with which we daily commune, and yet
arrogantly
adjudge others from a single action that may
not accord with our unsettled notions of right and
wrong.
Alice, as she spoke, turned not her head, but
continued
gathering her bundle of faggots.
For what purpose are you gathering that wood?
demanded Jurian.
To warm the dying, and keep the stream still
flowing
that the hand of death has already chilled.
And who is it, good mother, that claims your pious
care?
10*
One who has repeatedly called upon your name,
for he would see you again before his eyes are sealed
forever. I mean Corwin, that man of many woes.
Where is he? direct me to him, for him of all men
do I most desire to see.
Come along with me, and you shall be satisfied.
She raised her billet of wood upon her shoulder, and
moved towards the path that led to the forge. Jurian
offered to relieve her of her burden, but she replied
No; let my sufferings be as bitter as adversity can
heap upon me; let my pride be prostrate, and my spirit
broken, that not one spark may remain of that earthly
vanity which leads to sin.
They descended by the narrow path through the
wood into the valley, and after a silent walk of a few
minutes, they paused in front of a temporary shed which
had formerly been employed as a coal-house to the
neighbouring forge.
Enter, said Alice, and you will find the wretched
man here.
On a bundle of straw, wrapped up in a foul blanket,
lay the emaciated form of the suffering Corwin. In the
centre of the hovel were a few dying embers, the smoke
from which escaped by an aperture in the roof
occasioned
by the storm. Alice threw down her faggot,
and bending by the fire began to rekindle it, while the
sick man raised his head, and inquired in a feeble voice
who had entered with her. On being answered, he
sighed
Thank God, I shall see the boy again before I die.
Jurian approached the spot where Corwin was lying,
and taking his cold and bony hand, said
It grieves me to see that you have been so sorely
visited.
My trials have been many and severe, said the
sick man, but mourn not for merather rejoice, for
I am going where the weary are at rest.
To Jurian's inquiry how he had escaped from the
enemy, he replied, that being looked upon as a
harmless
wretch, and permitted to go at large, an
opportunity
soon presented itself of passing the lines, and he
was urged to seize upon it from the restlessness of his
nature, though every spot on earth was alike to him.
As the existence of each of us, continued the
mendicant, has in a very material degree governed
the fate of the other, I was anxious to make known to
you the circumstances of my life, while breath is spared
me. The brief career of thine is fully known. A cup
of water, Alice, for my lips are feverish, and my throat
so parched that I can scarcely breathe. She brought
the water, and stood beside him in silence.
Thank you. He took the cup, but was unable to
drink. Raise me gently; my frame is so wasted and
cramped with cold, that the slightest touch is torture.
Softly, or I shall expire.
She raised him, and he drank, but the exertion
nearly exhausted his strength. While she was busy
about him, tears started in her eyes, and coursed down
the furrows in her cheeks, which Corwin beheld, but
breathed not a word of condolence. He desired Jurian
to approach, when Alice withdrew to the fire, and
busied
herself in preparing some refreshment for the sick
man, who proceeded in his narrative in a tremulous and
broken voice
I was born in Virginia, of wealthy parentage, and
as I was an only child my education was suited to the
fortune I was to inherit. My parents were doatingly
fond of me, and their affection was not misplaced, for
every act of kindness made my heart swell with
gratitude
,
and I looked upon the world as a Paradise,
without
a serpent in it. I had never felt a pang, and could
not conceive an idea of human suffering. Behold me
now!
The first blow that awoke me from the bright
vision
of this world, was the death of my venerated
father
.
It was a heavy one, but my mother was still
remaining, though no longer the cheerful and happy
woman that had watched over my childhood, for what
are the vanities of this world to the widow! My
mother
was perfectly resigned to her fate; fulfilled all the
duties of life; and mourned not her loss with irreligious
tears; but still her smiles were buried in the grave
with my father.
My feelings towards the world were gradually
changed. The loss of one parent redoubled my
solicitude
and affection for the other; but at the expiration
of three years her earthly sorrows terminated, and
mine increased to an appalling magnitude. When our
affections become bankrupt in this world, we naturally
turn to heaven for consolationand no one, however
severely stricken, can ask for it in vain. I felt this
conviction, and thought that my life could not be better
employed than in endeavouring to persuade the skeptic
to the same opinion. I was still a young man of
extensive
property when holy orders were conferred upon
me. This world again looked cheerful. I dwelt in the
mansion of my fathers, and `blessed was my basket
and my store.'
Corwin paused to recover himself, for the effort of
speaking had exhausted his strength, and Alice
concealed
her face in her lap and gave vent to her tears.
The attention of the sick man was awakened by her
sobbing; he cast a look at her; a tear started in his
eye, which he hastily wiped away, and proceeded with
his narrative.
I will not attempt to describe the serenity of that
period, the comparison with the present might prove
too much for my feeble brain, for I have too often, in
the midst of my sufferings, impiously cried, `what is
my strength, that I should hope; and what is mine
end, that I should prolong my life?' But God gave
me strength to hope, and life, however abject, still
seemed a blessingthough I have seen friends pass
away as the course of the eagle, and have had this
devoted
head anointed with sorrow that consumed me
to the very bones. Had my strength been the strength
of stones, or my flesh of brass, I could not have
endured
more patiently. His recollection became painful,
and his imagination wandering: he sunk upon his
pallet
of straw, until sufficiently recovered to proceed.
About two years after I entered on my holy
functions
,
a young woman appeared in the village where I
resided. She was lovely, and her mind was above the
ordinary level;it was, however, tinctured with
melancholy
,
which to me was an additional attraction,
and though an entire stranger, her manners and
appearance
gained her the confidence and respect of the
most reputable families of the village. We became
intimate, and she gained my affections. My whole
soul was devoted to her, and we were married. Time
passed on swiftly, and each succeeding day awoke me
to new enjoyment. There was still a shade of
melancholy
over the lovely features of my wife, but as I
considered
it constitutional, I did not urge her to assign a
cause. I could not have conceived so angelic a being
capable of an action, the remembrance of which would
overcast her countenance with sorrow. My solicitude
gradually dissipated the gloom; at least she appeared
more cheerful when in my presence; and I flattered
myself her mind was perfectly restored.
Our loves were blessed with a daughter. Who
can describe the feelings of a parent upon the birth of
his first offspring! Until that occurrence my feelings
had been in the bud; but they now blossomed. I
was awakened to new life; and looked upon the
world through different optics. If I loved my wife
before
,
I now adored her, and my soul was never at rest
but when hovering around her and child. My
measure
of earthly joy was full; but there was a smack of
bitter in the cup that poisoned all.
About three years after my marriage, a traveller
rode up to my door and alighted; as I went out to
welcome him he advanced, and accosting me by name,
shook me cordially by the hand, and expressed his
satisfaction
at our meeting. I retained a faint
recollection
of his features, but could not remember where I
had seen him before. Perceiving my embarrassment,
he introduced himself by name, and proved to be an
early college acquaintance, and one for whom I had
entertained sentiments of regard. I had not seen him
since he was a youth of seventeen, and ten years had
expired, making a considerable alteration in his
features
.
I rejoiced at the meeting, and pressed him, if
it would not interfere with his business, to pass some
days with me. He stated that he was travelling to the
south, but his business was not so urgent but that he
could accept of my invitation. His horse was taken to
a stable, and we proceeded to the parlour where I had
left my wife sewing but a few moments before. She
was still seated on the sofa, engaged with her needle,
when we entered. She arose to receive us. I
introduced
my friend by name; she uttered a piercing
shriek, and fainted on the sofa.
The stranger had skill in medicinehe applied
the remedies the nature of the case required, and my
wife was speedily restored to her senses. She was
still much agitated and feeble, and apologised for the
awkward occurrence, which she attributed to recent
sickness, which she said had shattered her nervous
system to an alarming degree. I credited it all; for I
should as soon have questioned the veracity of a saint,
as suppose my wife capable of dissimulation. As she
still felt faint, she excused herself and retired to her
chamber to recover her spirits, assuring us that an
hour's rest would perfectly restore her.
The stranger and myself walked out to view my
improvements, and talk of our early recollections, and
the events of our lives since we separated at college.
Meetings of this kind, are as rays of light crossing the
gloomy pathway of life. When at college he was a
wild youth, obeying no law but such as his own
pleasure
prescribed, and was considered a libertine both in
principle and practice. His manners were fascinating,
and his conversation pleasing and instructive. He was
generous and braveromantically sobut his
religious
principles were vague, and his moral conduct
undecided
.
He was a polished scholar, and even at that
early age could read character intuitively, and had the
power to make whomsoever he pleased his friend. I
became sincerely attached to him.
Ten years had made a striking change in his
deportment
.
The levity of youth had disappeared, and the
sedateness of age was already on his brow. He
appeared
ten years older than he actually was; and his
mind had improved in the same proportion. Wisdom
dwelt upon his lips, and virtue now found an advocate
in his tongue. I hailed his conversion with a glad
heart, and imagined I beheld in the friend of my youth
a suitable companion for my riper years. My wife
appeared
at the tea table perfectly recovered, and more
cheerful than usual, though still pale, which I attributed
to her indisposition in the morning. The stranger was
at first reserved, but gradually entered with spirit into
conversation. He had travelled much, and nothing
seemed to have escaped his penetrating observation;
he had read much, and profited by what he read. We
listened to him with delight, and new life seemed to
kindle in the eyes of my wife as the words flowed from
his tongue.
Two months had passed away cheerfully, when
one evening he expressed his intention of proceeding
on his journey the following day. My wife changed
colour, and faltered out, `you will not leave us yet?'
It came to my senses as nothing more than an
expression
of civility, though to him it conveyed a far different
meaning. I also entreated him to prolong his visit, but
he excused himself by saying, that though his wishes
inclined that way, his affairs would not admit of it.
It was a calm evening in autumn,the moon was
shining serenely, and invited us to walk abroad. We
strolled along the banks of a river which flowed in front
of my dwelling, and as we drew near the humble
cottage
of one of my parishioners, a child ran towards us,
and exclaimed, sobbing`Oh! sir, my grandmother is
dying, and wishes to see you before she dies.' I
desired
my friend and wife to pursue their walk, while I
followed the weeping child to attend to my parochial
duties. I found an aged woman at the point of death,
and her descendants mourning around her. I
administered
hope to the troubled spirit, and remained with
her about an hour when she breathed her last. I then
withdrew, that I might not interrupt the feelings of the
mourners; for grief is not to be subdued at the flood
with consolation.
When I arrived at my home, the lights had burnt
nearly to the socket, and my wife had not returned. I
was astonished at the length of her absence, but
imagined
she had visited some one of my neighbours, and
with this thought I sat down contentedly to read.
Another
hour elapsed, and still they did not return. My
astonishment increased, and my alarm was excited lest
some accident had occurred, and accordingly I called
up one of my men-servants to go out with me to
ascertain
the cause of their absence. We met them at the
door; there was evident confusion in the countenances
of both, but as they stated they had passed the evening
at the house of a neighbour, and had hurried home on
discovering the night so far advanced, I attributed their
excitement to this cause. We retired to rest, and the
following morning our guest took his departure.
From that hour my wife relapsed into her former
melancholy, which I in vain endeavoured to dispel, for
my solicitude only served to increase her sorrow. Every
attempt to probe the cause proved fruitless: she
constantly
evaded my questions, and appeared relieved
when the subject was changed. She never mentioned
the name of our late guest, and when it passed my lips,
she betrayed an involuntary shudder. I accidentally
met the neighbour, at whose house they gave me to
understand they had passed the evening. I rallied him
for keeping such unseasonable hours, and detaining
systematic housewives from their families; but he
recollected
nothing of the visit, and stated my wife
had not been at his house for a month previous. This
was to me inexplicable,and the doubt arose, `Has
she then been guilty of falsehood!' but my heart
disclaimed
the suspicion, and I returned to my fireside
she was seated there, her needle in her hand. I fixed
my eyes upon her countenanceit was melancholy.
She raised her eyes to mine, and she never appeared
half so dear to me as at that moment. I turned from
her gaze, and sighed, `if this be guilt, what garb must
innocence assume?' I then kissed her, resolving to
banish all suspicion, and my conduct towards her was
now more affectionate than before, if possible.
It was, it was, cried Alice, to the grave I shall
never forget it. The foregoing recital was repeatedly
interrupted by the sobbings of Alice, which became
loud and bitter as memory recalled the scenes of
happiness
that her guilt had destroyed. Corwin
proceeded
A month passed away, and the melancholy of my
wife increased. My solicitude was redoubled, but she
received with coldness all my attentions, and my
caresses
with disgust. I proposed travelling, to divert
her mind, but she declined it. I pressed her to make
known to me her secret cause of grief, if any existed;
and she fell upon my neck in tears, and then withdrew
to her chamber. She remained there for several hours,
and when I sought her again to sooth her feelings, I
found her employed in writing. She extended her
hand to me as I entered, and said she felt better, but
desired to be alone. I kissed her and left her. She
again sat down at her desk and continued writing, and
VOL. II.11
I did not see her until the evening. She came to
the tea-table, and conversed more cheerfully than
usual. She caressed our little daughter repeatedly,
and handed her to me to receive my blessings. I shall
never forget that evening. The child was more
playful
than usual; and as I turned to my wife, and reflected
that she was the mother of that child, my love increased
almost to adoration. It was the happiest hour I ever
experienced, but it was the last hour of happiness I
have known. We retired to rest at the usual hour;
but the next morning when I awoke both my wife and
child were missing, and no trace remained of the
direction
they had taken.
After a long and fruitless search, I returned
disconsolate
and heart-broken. I entered my study, and as I
threw myself in a chair in an agony of grief, I beheld a
letter lying on the table before me. It was in my wife's
handwriting, and addressed to me. I trembled in every
limb as I broke the seal, and my eyes wandered
vacantly
over the characters. She stated that a sense of
her own worthlessness had driven her from me, for she
could no longer endure a life of duplicity. That my
caresses were torture, since she had wronged me, and
was a guilty and heart-broken being; for the friend I
had received at my fireside had betrayed me. She
conjured
me to forget her, but was that in nature! The
paper fell from my hand, for my whole frame shook as
if the palsy of age had smitten it; my brain whirled in
the confusion of half formed thought. I laughed wildly,
for I saw madness coming on, and at every stride I
laughed and laughed, until the horrid vacancy of my
own voice startled me back to a sense of reason; and
then I stood before my God, awed as if his finger had
been laid upon me, and from the very depth of my soul
I called upon him to curse the guilty pair.
And the malediction was heard, for he has cursed
them, exclaimed Alice.
May endless remorse corrode the hearts of the
wretches who could thus repay your kindness!
responded
Jurian.
Peace, peace, thou deserted one, cried Corwin,
they should be curst, they have been curst, but not
by thee, O no! not by thee.
By every one who has a sense of virtuemay
heaven
in its justice
Hold, hold, unnatural boyyou know not what
you dothey were your parents, exclaimed a voice
from another part of the building.
God of heaven!Jurian turned and discovered
that the voice proceeded from M`Crea, who had entered
unperceived during the foregoing.
The serpent has come in time to see the end of his
own work, cried Corwin, and laughing wildly, fell
exhausted
upon his pallet of straw.
Father and mother both, exclaimed M`Crea,
now while before you, complete the punishment due
to their offence, and curse them. It is right that guilt
should create its own punishment, and the fruits of
guilt curse the guilty.
Ay, let the fruits of guilt curse the guilty, cried
the maniac, and the building again resounded with the
wildness of his laughter.
Father and mother both! uttered Jurian, in a voice
nearly choked with emotionart thou my mother?
I know not that, replied Alice; he best can tell,
for he had charge of the evidence of our crime.
She is your mother, replied M`Crea. Thou art
her first borna child of shame, for she was a mother
before she beheld that injured man.
Jurian stood silent and motionless as a statue, while
horror was strongly depicted in his countenance.
Corwin
continued to laugh convulsively, and Alice
proceeded
in hurried and wild accents that betrayed her
remorse
O God! that I had never seen himnever wronged
himnever reduced him to this abject condition! I
then might hope, and should not fear to die. She
approached Jurian, who still stood as motionless as if
he had been transformed to stone: But you, my son,
will not despise and shun me. I have been guilty
too guilty to hope for pardon; but I have been penitent
and wretchedso wretched that my heart has been
broken with the fulness of my affliction.
And mine has been broken too, cried Corwin, and
laughed aloud.
The world has heaped reproaches on me,
continued
Alicemankind has persecuted and trampled
on me. I merited all, and bore all without repining.
But you, my son, will not spurn me, you will not
despise
and upbraid me. Let me sink to the grave, and
do not reproach my ashes.
Let me sink to the grave, let me sink to the grave,
responded Corwin.
Alice fell upon the neck of the youth, but he was
still silent and motionless, as though a thunderbolt had
transfixed him to the earth.
Speak to me, my son, she continued, it matters
not how great my offences against the rest of the world,
nothing can dissolve the link that exists between us.
Though degraded and guilty, remember I am your
mother still, and to embitter the remnant of my life is
to entail a curse upon thy own head. One that you
may not hope to escape, for it will surely light upon
you before you reach the grave. Speak to me, I
conjure
you, speak to me.
Jurian remained insensible to the appeal, and
apparently
unconscious of what was passing before him.
Alice turned from him in despair
He will not speak to me! The guilty mother
kneels to her son in vainthe offspring spurns the
author of his being!
Corwin called to M`Crea, in a voice scarcely
articulate
;
the surgeon turned to him, and the wretched man
continued with a vacant laugh, pointing at the stricken
beings before him
This is your work, this is your work! The ways
of crime are seldom so intricate but they may be
unravelled
at last. This is your work, I say, this is your
work!
His voice was lost in the rattling in his throat, and
was succeeded by a vacant chuckling laugh. He
stretched his emaciated limbs, and a convulsive
shudder
agitated his whole frame, but still he kept his
eye fixed on Alice and Jurian. M`Crea stood mutely
beside him, horror-struck at the fatal consequences of
his crime. He watched the changes in the maniac's
countenance, and taking his hand, of which the other
appeared unconscious, felt his pulse, which throbbed as
a single thread along his shrunken limb. He then laid
his hand upon the bosom of the dying man, to feel the
pulsations of his heart. Alice seated herself at his
feet, but Jurian had not yet moved, for there was one
thought that absorbed every faculty. She is my
mother
;
then what is Miriam! The rattling in Corwin's
throat increased, and he breathed with greater difficulty.
You are dying, said M`Crea, in a low voice.
I know itcould my mother have foreseen that
such would have been my death-bed, would she have
rejoiced, think you, when I was born?
Pray, Corwin, pray.
And what is there in a death-bed prayer? Thank
God I have prayed through life.
And have you forgiven those who wronged you?
Heaven is no place for earthly passion, replied
the dying man. Be all animosities settled in this
world. Mine are settled; and now there is but one to
stand between me and my God.
And he?
Will plead for me.
Press my hand in token that you die in peace with
all mankind.
11*
Corwin stretched out his hand, already as cold as
stone, which the surgeon eagerly grasped, but the other
was too feeble to return the pressure.
Press it, repeated the surgeon, or make some
sign that you forgive.
Corwin struggled to speak, his lips moved, but no
sound passed them; still the expression of his
countenance
denoted that every spark of rancour had
departed
from his bosom. M`Crea again pressed the cold
hand with energyhis heart was too full to speak, and
he fixed his eyes on those of the dying man, who
steadfastly
returned the gaze, and appeared to read what
was passing in the mind of the penitent M`Crea. A
guard now entered the building with captain Graham at
their head, who approached Jurian, and said
Lieutenant Hartfield, we are come in pursuit of
you, with orders to place you under arrest.
Jurian turned to him with a vacant look, that betrayed
that he did not understand the import of what was said.
Alice was roused by their entrance, and started to her
feet.
Upon what charge? demanded M`Crea.
One that I trust can never be substantiated, replied
Graham, he is accused of being a spy in the British
service.
And who has ventured to make so preposterous a
charge?
There stands his accuser, replied Graham,
pointing
at Alice, whose restless glance passed rapidly from
one object to another, and every moment became
wilder and wilder.
Woman, can this be so? and have you attempted
the life of your own son? demanded M`Crea.
Her own son! exclaimed all present in
amazement
.
We have reached the last link in the chain of
crime, muttered Corwin, in a voice scarcely above his
breath.
Speak, wretched woman, what led you to commit
an act so unnatural as this?
Madness! shrieked Alice. I am destined through
life to commit crime after crime, and each succeeding
act is more appalling than that which has gone before.
Murder my own son! husband and son both murdered
by me! What is there left for me to perpetrate more
damning than that already done. Point it out; I am
ready; there is no escapemy destiny must be
fulfilled
.
My own life by my own hand, is the only deed
worthy of one so blackened, and that would insure the
punishment merited by a career of ignominy and guilt.
Lead me to prison, said Jurian to Graham.
Do not leave me, cried Alice, throwing herself
upon his neck, do not leave meno sooner found
than lost! O! Jurian, I will forswear what I have
said. Hear me, he is as innocent as the babe unborn.
I was mad when I accused himI did it in obedience
to the malice of another, but now I say it is false.
Hear me! Ye will not take away the life of a man
upon the testimony of one too guilty herself to live!
Jurian released her hold and beckoned to M`Crea
to receive her, and then turning to captain Graham,
said
I am ready; do your duty, and they moved a few
paces towards the entrance to the building.
Hold, ye men of blood! cried Alice, ye would
not have a mother murder her own son! Hear me, I
say he is innocent. Ye will not drag him to a death
of shame upon the accusation of one whose life has
been one unbroken tissue of shame! Are ye men, and yet
destitute of mercy? Ye shall not tear us asunder; if he is
to die, let me die with him. She broke from M`Crea,
and again threw her arms frantically around the neck
of Jurian.
Take her away, said the young man, in a cold
tone, that chilled for a moment the fervid feelings of
Alice. And now, continued he, take me away
also.
That voice freezes my blood! Stay, stay, my son,
nor hasten to a death of shame!
Mother, replied Jurian, calmly, I owe to you a
life of shame, and it is right that I should be indebted
to you for a shameful death also.
Alice sunk into the arms of M`Crea, while Jurian
motioned to the guard to conduct him from the
building
,
and his miserable parents were left alone. The
shades of night were fast approaching, and the piercing
wind carried along with it a dirgelike strain as it swept
over the waste of snow. The wretched pair stood
silent until the receding tread of the soldiers, breaking
through the encrusted surface, was no longer heard,
and they hung upon that sound as though it had been
a note of joy, for it seemed to disarm despair of half its
poignancy. The wretched never feel the extent of
their wretchedness until left to commune with their own
thoughts, where no human sound may reach them, and
call them back to what is passing in this world. When
the footsteps of the soldiers were no longer heard,
Alice turned to M`Crea, and said in a low tremulous
voice
How silent it is!Speak to me, M`Crea, though
you heap reproaches on meI care not, so I hear a
human voice, for it is as fearfully silent here as though
we were among the dead.
And we are with the dead, responded M`Crea.
She turned her eyes towards Corwin, who had expired,
and seeing that he lay motionless, she hurried to him,
and placed her hand upon his forehead, but recoiled at
the touch, and shrieked
Cold as stone! the damps of death are there! his
eyes are fixed and glazed! O God! he has gone
without pardoning me!
Not so; your fault was forgiven; he died in peace
with all mankind.
Impossible! He has not, he could not pardon me,
but has died with all his bitter feelings towards me still
fresh in his mind, and there they will remain appalling
evidence against me in heaven, as they have been in
this world. I did hope that offence might have been
expiated
here, but he is dead, and now there is no hope left.
I say he pardoned you, and his last breath was a
prayer for those who wronged him.
What is there on earth that I would not give to
have heard that prayer! She gazed fixedly upon the
face of Corwin, and bursting into an agony of tears,
kissed him repeatedly, all the while exclaiming, O!
that I had heard that prayer!
When her feelings had in some measure subsided,
M`Crea proposed going to the camp to procure
assistance
to remove the body, and leave Alice to watch by
it until his return. I fear not the living, she replied,
but I may not stay alone with the dead. He then
directed her to go and acquaint Mauns Talman with
what had occurred, and he would await her return.
Alice left the building, and he rekindled the fire, and
seated himself beside the inanimate clay, and
communed
with it, as though it still retained all the faculties
of life. And where is he who has not spoken to the
dead, and for a moment fancied that he was understood!
While gazing on the deserted tenement of the soul, it
requires a struggle to believe that the form, but late
elastic with life, and through which the ethereal essence
moved so mysteriously, imparting its influence to every
atom, that they appeared to be one and indivisiblethe
master-work of the master-handit requires a
struggle
,
I say, to reconcile the mind to the idea that an
eternal divorce has taken place, that all the exquisite
faculties of that complicated work have been in an
instant
paralyzed and forever, and that he who had
usurped all things to his own use, has been hurled from
the summit of his arrogance to the insignificance of
the clod of the valley, without a solitary attribute
remaining superior to the dust with which he is doomed
to mingle.
CHAPTER IX.
No funeral rites, nor man in mournful weeds,
Nor mournful bell shall ring
his
burial.
Shakspeare
.
May I not take mine ease in mine inn?
Ib
.
The
morning succeeding the events related in the
preceding chapter, captain Swain was despatched with
a foraging corps with instructions to impress not only
provender for the garrison, but such articles of clothing
as the possessors would not willingly part with, as the
troops were perishing with cold. He was averse to the
expedition, as he could not find it on record that his
illustrious ancestor had ever resorted to similar means
of sustaining his army, and our worthy captain
eschewed
all modern innovations. There was not a post and
rail fence to be seen on his whole farm, as he gave a
decided preference to the zigzag means of enclosure
introduced by his Swedish ancestors, and when one of
his neighbours tried the experiment of a hawthorn
hedge, the worthy captain pronounced him without
qualification a fit subject for bedlam. He carried his
primitive notions so far, that to the day of his death he
had his coat cut after the fashion of one that belonged
to his grandfather, and most religiously believed that
every departure from that venerated model tended to
render the human form divine, ridiculous, and was an
approach towards barbarism. What would be the
feelings
of the honest old grazier, could he witness the
present age of rail-roads and canals, in which fashion
undergoes mutation before our clothes are dismissed
from the taylor's shopboard, and inventions succeed
each other in such rapid succession, that we have not
time to give one a fair trial before our attention is
attracted
to another!
The sun was just rising as captain Swain, at the head
of the foraging party, left the camp. It had rained
during the night, and the trees and surrounding
objects
,
encased in ice, sparkled in the feeble rays of the
morning sun as though they had been hung with gems.
The snow was encrusted, and lay in dazzling
whiteness
before them as far as the eye could extend, and
as they moved on, they seemed to pass through `a
world of entire chrysolite.' Every twig and blade of
grass was hung with diamonds, and nature in her
desolation
appeared in a few hours to have been
transformed
into a fairy region, and the stirring notes of the
reveille added to the illusion.
The foragers had not proceeded far from the camp,
when on the sunny side of a hill, near the forge
mentioned
in the last chapter, they beheld a group of four
beneath a spreading oak, two of whom were busily
employed
in shovelling away the snow, and the others
were standing mournfully at a short distance
contemplating
an object lying on the ground. The group was
silent, and as the foragers approached they recognised
in one of the labourers sergeant Talman, whom they
hailed, but he returned no answer, nor did he as much
as raise his head at the salutation. He continued his
work, and the two beings who stood near him were too
much engrossed with their own feelings to attend to
what was passing. The foragers halted at the foot of
the acclivity, curious to know what that silent group
was about, which another glance explainedthey were
performing the last rites to the dead. Not a word was
spoken by the group on the hill, while conjecture
passed
from one soldier to another as to whose mortal
remains
commanded this unusual mark of distinction.
They had been in the habit of seeing their comrades
consigned in an indiscriminate mass to one common
grave. Captain Swain no sooner recognised M`Crea
and Alice standing by the body than all was plain to
him, and he commanded his troop to move forward,
and they left the mourners to perform their melancholy
duty.
They proceeded along the valley that led to the
river, and the solemn scene was not yet out of view,
when one of a widely different nature presented itself.
A burst of wild revelry saluted their ears, and after
riding around a hillock, thickly covered with scrubby
pine, they came in full view of the river, and
immediately
discovered whence the sound proceeded.
On the bank of the Schuylkill was a company of
about twenty soldiers seated around a large fire, before
which was an entire hog roasting. Liquor was
circulating
freely, their mirth was boisterous, and the
foragers
were forcibly struck with the contrast between
this scene and that they had left a few moments
previous
.
The revellers proved to be certain officers of
the Virginia line, and others. Captain Swain and his
company halted; and one of a swarthy complexion,
dark heavy eyebrows, and large and commanding
features
,
approached and exclaimed
Captain will you partake of our barbacue? you
will find it wholesome, though not as palatable as it
might be. He was of the middle stature, and of a
slender form. His dark eye was penetrating and
serious
,
while a smile enlivened the lower part of his
countenance
:
his dress was that of a confirmed sloven, or
in other words, a man whose mind is superior to things
of that nature, but his equipments indicated an officer
of no ordinary grade. Captain Swain politely declined
the invitation.
Come, captain, and partake with us, cried
Graham
,
who was among them, there is no treason in the
feast: for the devil has long been exorcised from hog's
flesh.
Others spoke more plainly, from which it appeared
that the company consisted of those who were desirous
of having Washington removed from the chief
command
of the American forces.
What duty are you upon? inquired the officer who
first addressed the descendant of Sven Schute.
To forage the neighbourhood, was the reply.
A politic mode of conducting a campaign. Are
you in an enemy's country, that you sally forth to
plunder
,
and wrest from the hand of the needy labourer his
last morsel of sustenance?
Our magazines are exhausted, and they must be
replenished speedily, or famine will be in the garrison,
replied Swain.
Pretty management, by G, exclaimed the other,
curling his lip with contempt, after a distressing
campaign
,
which has disheartened the soldiers and worn
them to skeletons, you enter winter quarters in
miserable
huts, without clothes, blankets, or straw; or even
as much as a dry biscuit in your stores. Fine
management
,
truly! Have you an army of chameleons, that
you expect them to endure all this patiently?
We hope to remedy the evil by taking it in hand
at an early period.
It should never have existed, replied the other,
and had competent men had the control of affairs,
it never would have existed. But you modern Quixotes
have not work enough with the enemy, but you must
create a hydra, merely for the pleasure of lopping off
its numberless heads. Why were not provisions
secured
before we hutted? and why are the soldiers
suffered
to run naked, while there is an abundance of
clothing provided for the army rotting upon the road
and in the woods, for the want of means to bring it to
the camp?
VOL. II.12
As that subject is not embraced within my line of
duty, I am unable to give a satisfactory answer,
replied
captain Swain, and the officer withdrew towards
the fire in silence.
Corporal Drone, who was much more partial to
eating
than fighting, hearing that there was to be a
barbacue
near the Schuylkill that morning, he made it his
business to stroll that way, and trust to his wits to help
him to a share of the feast. He was accordingly upon
the field of action before the company arrived; and
when they came, he officiously offered his services to
build the fire, attend to their horses, prepare the pork
for cooking, or any menial office that might be
considered
a sufficient excuse for his remaining in the
company
.
This worthy, finding that his threadbare rifle
shirt was not altogether adapted to the season, no
sooner heard that captain Swain was on a foraging
expedition
,
than he volunteered his services to accompany
him, with the hope that his wardrobe might be
replenished
before he returned to camp.
The corporal was one of that numerous class, who
consider mankind in no other light than as tenants in
common, in regard to the things of this world; he had
not yet acquired sufficient Latin to discover the
difference
between
meum
et
tuum
, and in consequence of his
defective education, he was continually mistaking the
property of other people for his own. Or perhaps the
corporal acted upon the broad principle of natural law,
which says that possession alone gives right, and as
soon as the possessor relinquishes his hold, the property
reverts to the common stock, and is at the service of
whoever may wish to employ it. Or perhaps the
corporal
did not trouble his head much about the subtleties
of the law, or care much in whom the right of property
was vested, so that he had actual possession. Be this
as it may, the corporal had of late become weary of
marching and countermarching; and meeting with a
half starved Rosinante in his travels, when a little
leg-weary
,
he patriotically devoted him to the service of
his country, without as much as asking permission of
the owner. This charger was now fastened to a laurel
bush hard by, endeavouring to quell an intestine war
by mumbling a few dried leaves, with as much
earnestness
as if they had been corn or luxuriant clover.
Drone no sooner saw the foragers about to depart, than
he bestrode his war-horse, and
shambled
after them,
though his stomach exclaimed loudly against
leaving
the barbacue untouchedand the corporal was a
humane man to his own stomachbut his back cried
aloud for covering, and after much perplexity he
listened
with becoming charity to its petition.
The foragers not being very successful along the
river, for the British had already been over the ground,
changed their route, and took a southerly direction.
After a ride of about two hours, they came in sight of
Ephraim Horne's house, a substantial stone building,
which indicated the prosperity of the possessor. The
political principles of Ephraim were well known, and
as it was suspected that in disposing of his provisions
he preferred receiving British gold to continental paper,
the party approached the house with fewer
compunctious
visitings than they would, had he been friendly to
the cause, or passively inimical. Ephraim saw the
troop approaching, and though greatly alarmed at
such an unwelcome sight, he hastened to the front of
his house, to ascertain the object of this unexpected
visit. It was with difficulty he mustered sufficient
courage
to sustain the interview, for as he had been to the
city within the preceding week, his conscience
whispered
there was danger to be apprehended. He was
therefore considerably relieved when captain Swain
announced to him their business. Ephraim expressed
his regret, but protested he had no provisions on his
farm, as the enemy had been there a few weeks before,
and swept every thing away.
Corporal Drone was as well acquainted with
Ephraim's premises as he was himself, and was not
ignorant of the stock he had on hand; and as the
corporal
at present considered it expedient to make
himself
both conspicuous and useful, he quietly slid from
his garran and disappeared, while the farmer was
giving
a piteous account of the imaginary losses he had
sustained by the depredations of the British. The
quaker spoke so smoothly, that captain Swain credited
implicitly all he said, and was about proceeding, when
the corporal appeared, driving three fat steers before
him. Ephraim turned pale at the sight, and approached,
with the intention of driving them back.
Hold, cried the corporal, interposing, it is true
these steers were designed for the British market, but
they must turn their heads in another direction.
You do not mean to rob me?
Not at all, replied the other, you will be
liberally
paid in continental paper for every pound we
take; but as it would be treason in us to leave these
fat steers
Treason! what does thee mean? it will be
barefaced
robbery if thee takes them.
But treason if we leave them, interrupted Drone,
for they will certainly find their way to the city to
feed the enemy. So they must go along with us, and
you should thank me for saving your conscience from
such a reproach, and perhaps your neck from a halter.
Ephraim, upon the mention of a halter, thought
proper
to drop the altercation, and captain Swain desired
him to set a price upon his steers, which was
accordingly
done, allowing a liberal advance upon
receiving
depreciated paper instead of sterling coin.
While this was transacting, the corporal drew nigh to
the door, which being partly open, he had a view of the
hall, in which, from a row of pegs, he beheld a portion
of Ephraim's wardrobe suspended. Drone glided in,
and instantly appeared, with a drab quaker coat over
his torn rifle shirt, and a surtout across his arm
Captain Swain, while your hand is in, you may as
well strike a bargain for these articles, which come
within the letter of our warrant. Ephraim
expostulated
.
For shame of yourself, continued the
corporal
,
Saint Martin divided his mantle with a beggar,
and as you are a good christian you should imitate so
praiseworthy an example.
As Ephraim was well clad, these additional coats
were considered superfluous; he therefore expostulated
in vain, for though the case was a hard one, yet the
emergencies of the army would not admit of an
argument
as to the justice of the measure: the quaker was
obliged to set a price upon his apparel, which was paid,
and the soldiers departed, driving the steers before
them. Ephraim stood watching them with a heavy
heart until they were out of sight, and then cast a
sorrowful
look upon his paper money. His mortification
was twofold, as he had intended the following day to
drive his cattle to Philadelphia, and transmute them
into gold. Two of the soldiers took charge of the
provender
collected, and returned towards Valley Forge;
the rest of the party continued their search through the
counties of Chester and Delaware.
The corporal had no sooner accomplished the object
that induced him to volunteer his services, than his
zeal evaporated, and he availed himself of the first
opportunity
of taking French leave, to the no small
satisfaction
of his wretched garran, who was all unused to
the rapid locomotion employed by the troopers. The
corporal now being at liberty to follow his own
inclination
,
turned his horse's head in the direction of the
Crooked Billet, for it was a custom he observed most
religiously, never to pass within three miles of
Nicholas's
tavern, without stopping to inquire after the health
of that worthy personage, and at the same time drink
to it in a glass of Geneva, if he could get credit for the
value of the liquor.
A tavern sign maintained an influence over the
corporal
,
12*
corresponding with that of the north pole over
the magnetic needle. He could never pass without
turning, and seldom without stopping. On his way to
the Crooked Billet, one of these signs that ruled his
destiny caught his eyeit was the Seven Starsand
the corporal was always disposed to study astronomy
when he beheld his horoscope so near him. His horse
also had a like propensity with his master, and when
he halted in front of the inn, Drone felt exceedingly
compassionate towards the dumb beast, and
dismounted
that he might breathe and be fed, after the unusual
exertion of the morning. He accordingly directed his
horse to be taken care of, entered the inn and ordered
dinner for himself in a tone as commanding as if he
had intended to pay for it, for Drone was a decided
autocrat where he imagined he had a right to command.
We occasionally meet with this feature in the minds of
the loudest declaimers against arbitrary power.
The corporal drew forth his pipe, lighted it, and
taking the choicest seat before the fire, made himself
perfectly at home. He talked politics to the landlord,
and recounted his military exploits to the landlady and
her daughter, until they imagined that the destiny of
the new states was at the disposal of their unknown
guest. Their humble roof had never been so highly
honoured, and the corporal perceiving the impression
he had made, assumed a patronising air, and invited
the whole family to dine with him, instead of inviting
himself to dine with the family, which was his original
intention. A distinction without a difference, for it
amounted to the same thing to all parties in the end.
What with smoking, talking, eating, and drinking,
the corporal found himself in comfortable quarters, and
so much was he delighted with his entertainment, to
which he did ample justice, that he protested roundly,
that for the future he would take that inn under his
especial
protection, and evinced his friendly disposition
by suggesting various alterations, such as removing
the bar to another part of the room, converting the
door into a window, and a window into a door, tearing
down a stack of chimneys on this side, and running up
another on the opposite; by widening the piazza,
building a new kitchen, and retouching the Seven Stars,
for they appeared to be under a cloudhe suggested
twenty other improvements, most of which were as
impracticable
to mine host as a pilgrimage to the moon,
but still they tended to impress him with vast ideas of
the importance of his guest, which was the mark the
corporal aimed at. He belonged to that numerous herd
that plan palaces for others to build, without the means
within themselves to construct a pigstye, and who talk
largely of the luxuries of life, even while they sit
cross-legged
to conceal the rent in their apparel. There is
no one so abject but that he imagines himself capable
of planning for the comfort of another, and his fingers
itch to put his schemes in execution, in order to afford
the world an example how to live.
Evening was now approaching, and the gathering
clouds in the west portended a coming storm. The
corporal bethought him that it was time to move
towards
the Crooked Billet, satisfied that he would meet
with comfortable quarters there, and a hearty welcome
from Nicholas, who was a good-natured fellow in the
main, and fond of having his joke with the corporal,
who was nothing loth as long as he got his liquor scot
free. But how was he to quit the Seven Stars, and
escape the disagreeable ceremony of first adjusting
the score! This idea made him thoughtful, he knit
his brows, cursed the Stars, and cocking his hat
fiercely, took several turns around the room in silence.
The landlord beheld this sudden transition in
amazement
,
for Drone had been in excellent humour all the
afternoon, and laughed vociferously at every joke mine
host had perpetrated. The corporal continued pacing
the room, and occasionally muttering unintelligibly,
which tended to increase the amazement of the other,
who believed he was planning the overthrow of the
invading
army at least, when Drone paused abruptly,
and desired him to make out the bill, and harkye,
landlord, continued he, charge your own
entertainment
to my account, for I play the host to-day.
The landlord withdrew behind the bar to consult
Cocker's Arithmetic, and Drone commenced pacing
the room again, at double-quick time. His moody
humour increased, and more than once did mine host
raise his eyes from his paper, in amazement at the
rapid
movements of his guest, who suddenly left the
room, and afforded him an opportunity of working out
his abstruse calculation without interruption. This was
quite a relief to him of the Seven Stars, and in the
space of ten minutes, he was prepared for that most
disagreeable part of an entertainment, the presentation
of the reckoning, but as the corporal never had any
stomach for such a dessert, he bethought him that he
had better take a ride first, by way of sharpening his
appetite. There was nothing in life that he abhorred
like a tavern bill, and frequently did he protest against
the selfish custom that tended to put the best natured
man out of humour, and render him uncomfortable.
He of the Seven Stars sat long, in expectation of his
return, but though he had sat until his Stars had
vanished
,
he would not have caught a glimpse of the
corporal again. Growing impatient he went out to the
stable, when the absence of the corporal's horse let
him into a secret, and searching further, he discovered
that Drone in his hurry had mistaken the best bridle of
mine host for his own, which he charitably attributed
to an absence of mind occasioned by the weight of
public affairs, and he now considered his guest a
greater man than ever. A pompous bearing is a jewel
beyond price, for even paste may pass for a diamond
with the unskilful lapidary.
The storm was gathering fast, and mountains of
dense clouds arose like contending armies above the
western horizon. They moved on gloomily in solid
phalanx, column after column, until the whole western
sky was covered to the zenith, and the armament
appeared
arrayed, ready for the conflict. Drone, as he
beheld the imposing spectacle, lost but little time in
admiration, but pushed his horse to the top of his
speed, which was a peculiar gait between a shamble
and a gallop, for the corporal had two objects in view,
and luckily for him they went hand in hand together
the first was to escape from the storm, and the other
from the host of the Seven Stars.
Never were the rib-displaying sides of the corporal's
garran so belaboured with crab-tree cudgel, nor had
the valiant corporal for many a day performed such a
task of thrashing as upon this memorable occasion.
He laboured with a zeal that became a better cause.
Many a glance did he turn towards the threatening
clouds, thence his eye would descend to the road he
had traversed, and the third motion was a dexterous
flourish of the crab-tree cudgel, which the poor beast
acknowledged by a toss of the head and a switch or
two of the tail, and there was an end of it. The
longest
lane must have an end, says the proverb, and so it
was with the corporal's journey, notwithstanding its
discouraging aspect. In the course of an hour his eyes
were greeted with the welcome sight of the Crooked
Billet swinging in the wind that piped mournfully.
Night was closing in, the rain had commenced falling,
and it froze as it fell; the corporal was not well equipt
for travelling in such a night, and he already enjoyed
in anticipation the comforts of Nicholas's bar-room.
Even the president of a Temperance Society, under
similar circumstances would acknowledge that some
good might come out of Nazareth. The corporal rode
under the shed, and having secured his horse, entered
the Crooked Billet with as little ceremony as though
he had been confident of a cordial welcome. Nicholas
was alone, seated at the fire, musing, or rather
seeming
to muse, for the mind is seldom so inactive as
when wrapped in what is commonly called a
brownstudy
.
Here you are, Nicholas, my boy, exclaimed the
corporal, as he entered, as snug as a thief in a mill.
Let the storm pour, here we may laugh and be merry,
and though it knock until the morning, we will bar the
door, and it shall not enter, for we look not for such
watery guests at the Crooked Billet, ha! Nicholas!
Some rum ones enter without knocking; replied
the bruiser, in a surly tone, without rising from his
seat.
Such are always welcome at an inn, replied the
corporal. Who is it fills your bar with rosy liquor
but the rum ones? Who is it makes your hearth blaze
so cheerfully but the rum ones? Who is it makes your
table groan with plenty, albeit they consume but little?
why the rum ones. And let me tell you, Nicholas, if
it were not for the pimple-faced jolly dogs, you might
lay the axe to your sign-post, and warm yourself with
it before spring.
Humph! grunted Nicholas, without turning his
face from the fire, and the corporal began to question
his welcome. But he was a man not easily to be driven
from a bar-room, and believing that if he could only
get Nicholas into conversation, he would succeed in
talking him out of his ill humour, and thus prevent a
summary ejectment, he continued
Have you heard the news, old boy? Strange
events have transpired since I last tasted your Geneva.
By the beard of Aaron, 'tis passing all belief. Jurian
Hartfieldyou know the boyhas been charged with
being in British pay. A spy, Nicholas! a traitor to
his country! think of that. Patriotism has become
nothing more than a word to gull the credulous, and
we who honestly contend for freedom shall have our
lives bartered by those in whom we repose the
greatest
confidence.
Is that all? said Nicholas.
The boy has been placed under arrest, and I fear
it will go hard with him on his trial, for the evidence is
as clear as noon day.
That's his affair, not mine.
But what is most remarkable, continued Drone,
the principal witness against him is his own mother,
who it was denounced him.
Is Alice Grey his mother? demanded Nicholas.
So it is said, but she was not aware of the fact
until after the accusation was made. But how is it
that you are acquainted with the circumstances
already
?
That's my business, not yours.
Zounds! Nick, you are as crusty as if you had
lived in a bake-oven all your days.
That's my affair. But if you do not wish to be
benighted, it is time for you to be gone.
Be gone! benighted!Why zounds! Nick, it is
as dark as the devil already.
That's your affair, not mine.
Only look to the west and behold what a storm is
brewing; such a one as would have drowned all the
frogs and locusts that curst the kingdom of Pharaoh,
and can you have the bowels to drive me out to abide
its fury?
Humph! ejaculated Nicholas, and pointed to the
door.
Be not so laconic, but speak out like a host of
hospitality.
You came uninvited, and even so depart, said
Nicholas.
You are jesting! By the beard of Aaron, you
cannot
be in earnest!
The scowl on the dark countenance of Nicholas
became more lowering, but the corporal continued
You were always a wag, Nick, a merry wag; the
shaggy eyebrows of mine host pursed closer together;
and as I have made a vow never to leave your house
with a dry lip, I will even scent my way to your jug of
Geneva. This was accompanied by a short
chuckling
laugh, and he made a move towards the bar;
Nicholas rose, remained stationary, and without
speaking
,
waved his right hand towards the door. His fist
was clenched; the corporal hesitated; he looked in
the landlord's countenance, and beheld a more
threatening
storm gathering there, than that without;
Nicholas
advanced one step; the corporal retreated
towards
the door; he advanced a second; the corporal
seized the wooden latch, and kept his eyes fixed on
the threatening attitude of the other, and while in this
position the door was violently pushed open; the
corporal
staggered beneath the shock, and in stalked Paul
Gordon. In an instant Drone vanished, slammed the
door after him, and left the worthies alone.
The poor corporal, exclaimed Nicholas,
laughing
,
was loth to turn out until you turned in, but
faith, he was not long in making up his mind on your
appearance.
It is an ugly night, Nicholas, replied Paul, for
either man or beast to be abroad. Are we alone?
Quite alone.
Then this night's campaign does not promise to
be a very profitable one. I have taken but one purse
from a committee of safety man, who was travelling to
the west. He had lodged it in his bosom, next his
heart, and from his care I supposed I had taken a
prize, but on opening it, I found it crammed with
continental
paper. What rubbish man will lay next his
heart, Nicholas!
Damned rubbish, indeed, responded mine host
of the Billet.
The business I spoke to you about, Nicholas, is
in a fair train, and it will be necessary for you in a few
days to go to the Forge, and give your evidence against
the accused. Have you thought well upon the story
you are to tell? Look out that there be no flaws in
it, for if we succeed the reward will be liberal, and all
in gold. Think of that, Nicholas.
I have, and if I don't make out a plain case, they
will have very little faith in a kiss on a book, I promise
you. I may swear with a safe conscience, for it will
be all true, you know; and though I did not see the
transaction myself, you will vouch for it, and that's
the same thing in the end.
I will vouch for every word, replied Paul, and
would give my evidence myself, could it be done with
safety, but I don't think it would be prudent for me at
present to appear before an American court martial.
I don't think it would, said Nicholas.
But that's no reason why the guilty should escape
punishment, said Paul.
Certainly not, replied Nicholas, and I think it
a virtue to strain a point on such an occasion.
Especially if you be well paid for it, said Paul.
Virtue should always be rewarded, said Nicholas,
otherwise vice would be the most profitable pursuit,
and that should never be the case in a moral
community
.
You speak like a preacher.
It is necessary for us to be quick on the trigger,
continued Nicholas, for Jurian is already in limbo,
and his business will doubtless be settled speedily.
Some folk complain of the law's delay, but I am not
of the number. He chuckled dryly as he concluded.
Jurian already apprehended! exclaimed Paul;
where heard you this?
From the corporal, who also brought a stranger
piece of news?
What news?
The boy turns out to be Alice Grey's son.
Alice Grey's son! Impossible.
True! The mother has condemned her own son
VOL. II.13
to the scaffold. A strange world, and strange things
come to pass in it!
Strange, indeed! Poor Miriam!
And as we cannot hope to have the benefit of the
old woman's testimony in the present case, we must
look around for another witness; for possibly my story
may require bolstering.
True; another shall be found.
But don't you think that a good round sum might
still tempt the old woman?
You know her not. Though the earth were piled
to the heavens with gold, it would not tempt her.
It is astonishing how very silly some people are!
ejaculated Nicholas. Well, what's to be done?
Leave that to me. Jurian her son! Bring me
some liquor, Nicholas, and look out and tell me
whether
the storm has abated. He placed a bottle
before
Paul, and went to the door.
It is confounded dark and cold, said Nicholas,
but it does not rain as fast as when you entered.
It is well. Sit down, old boy, and let us drink
success to our enterprise. I have not many moments
to stay.
You had better make a night of it.
No; time presses, and I must see Madge, and
prepare her for the occasion. I will call here as I
return
to-morrow.
Then all will be snug; for there is not a clearer
witness in a nice case in the whole county than that
same Madge.
By the time our worthies had finished the bottle, the
storm had abated its fury, and Paul remounted and
pursued his way towards the cottage of Madge Haines,
while Nicholas barred his door and retired to bed, and
commenced weaving his chain of testimony against
Jurian.
CHAPTER X.
Heart of my body, here's a coil indeed,
With your jealous humours.
Cynthia's Revels
.
Paul Gordon
had of late become more remiss in
his attentions to Mistress Haines, who did not fail to
upbraid him with his faithlessness in order to reclaim
him to his allegiance; but it is the decided opinion of
Socrates, that when the blandishments of love cease
to have an influence, it is in vain to attempt to bully a
man into affection. Mistress Haines, however, differed
from the philosopher, and was unwilling to consider
the point as fully settled: accordingly, the perjured
Paul, when on his amorous visits, instead of meeting
with such a reception as he had reason to expect from
a disciple of the sea-froth goddess, was obliged to
buckle on his armour and withstand the sharp
encounter
of an Achilles in petticoats. This for a short time
Paul considered the very spice of life, but as it daily
became more highly seasoned, he found it rather
unpalatable
,
and felt uncomfortable after partaking of the
repast. In proportion as his visits became less
frequent
,
Madge seasoned the entertainment, which
finally
became so pungent, that even the fireproof palate of
Paul could not bear it; and Mistress Haines found too
late that man is faithless, and woman is born to trouble
as the
sparks
fly from them.
On the night to which we have brought our
narrative
,
Madge, while ruminating alone in her cottage,
listening to the pelting storm, and watching the blaze
which occasionally arose from the embers, mouldering
in the huge fireplace, and after playing for a few
moments
about the surface of the ashes, and casting
fantastic
shadows over the smoke-dried room, would go
out and leave all in total darknessthe pensive
damsel
was disturbed by a gentle tap at the door, which at
first was scarcely audible, owing to the continued
pattering
of the rain upon the roof of the cottage. The
knock was repeated and the door was opened, when
Miriam Grey entered, drenched with rain and nearly
fainting with fatigue. She sunk exhausted upon a seat
which stood beside the door, and it was some
moments
before she recovered sufficient strength to
apologise
for the unceremonious intrusion. When she
raised her head her countenance was pale and
melancholy
,
and her eyes were red with weeping, and tears
were still trickling from them
I hope you will excuse the liberty I have taken,
she said, but the night is a frightful one, and I feel
I have already gone beyond my strength.
You are welcome to my poor hovel, replied
Madge, for the night is too stormy for any christian
soul to be abroad, much less a feeble woman. Come,
draw your stool to the hearth while I rake the coals
together.
The blessings of heaven be on you: I thought I
should have perished in the woods this night, but your
charity has saved me.
Madge drew the coals together, and threw some
light wood upon them, which speedily blazed up.
Come, you are shivering with cold; draw up to
the fire and warm yourself. Doubt not your welcome.
Miriam rose, but reseated herself immediately,
being
unable to walk to the fire. Madge observed her
distress, and said
You appear quite overcome with fatigue.
I am, indeed, replied the other faintly.
Lean on me; poor soul, how pale she looks, and
how feeble.
With the assistance of Madge, the sick woman
supported
herself to the fire, and sunk upon a stool which
the other had placed in the corner to receive her.
Thank you, thank you, heaven's blessing be on
you, said Miriam, with a feeble and faltering voice.
Your cloak is dripping with rain: take it off, and
I will hang it behind the door to dry.
You are kind, but I fear I am troublesome.
Don't think of it. Come, give me your cloak, for
if you sit longer in your wet clothes, you will take
your death of cold.
Miriam untied her cloak and handed it to the other,
who scrutinized her figure as if she recollected having
seen her before.
Which way are you travelling?
To Lancaster; but I fear I shall never reach it.
It is a long journey for a lone woman and a young
one; and you are already worn down with fatigue.
Have you any friends in the place you are going to?
Friends! alas! I have none on earth! replied
Miriam, and began weeping.
So young, and so forlorn! Where do you intend
sleeping to-night?
I know not; in my grave, if I am turned from your
door. But I care not, though it be in the grave.
Poor wretch! I am not so hard-hearted; my own
sufferings have taught me to feel for others. Would
you have any thing to eat?
Nothing: rest is all I require, for I feel very
faint.
The door now opened, and Paul Gordon entered.
He shook the rain from his broad brimmed hat, which
he hung upon a peg behind the door; and as he
approached
the blazing hearth, Miriam raised her
languid
head, and immediately shrunk back with horror,
13*
as she recognised in his countenance the features of
her persecutor Jonesthough his Quaker apparel was
well calculated to deceive a less scrutinizing eye. She
involuntarily articulated his name, and averted her
face, and though she spoke almost inaudibly, the name
fell distinctly upon the watchful ear of the jealous and
neglected Madge. Paul, as he stood spreading his
large form before the cheerful blaze of the fire,
pretended
not to recognise in the miserable being who sat
trembling beside him, the once lovely and innocent
object of his persecution. He said, in a careless tone
A rough night this, stranger, to be abroad, and I
thank Fortune that I have got under cover at last.
Miriam made no reply, for the well known tones of
his voice only served to increase her terror and
agitation
;
and as Paul himself did not feel altogether
unconcerned
at her presence, a profound silence
prevailed
for some moments. After having warmed himself,
he said
It is growing late, and my ride through the storm
has chilled and wearied me, so good night to both;
I will go to bed.
He entered the adjoining room, but on closing the
door he cast a look upon the unfortunate wanderer,
which did not escape the notice of his Dulcinea, who
followed him with a light.
So; you are acquainted with this trull too it
seems, said Madge, after a pause, which was spent
in working herself into a passion.
I have seen the poor girl before, replied our
knight of the stirrup.
And will see her again?
Doubtless!
But never under this roof.
Then she will have to be very expeditious in
departing
,
replied Paul.
And so she shall: for out she goes this instant.
No; she shall not.
Who will prevent it?
Your heart.
Pshaw! my heart! You make us devils, and yet
expect to find us angles. My heart!
If your's wont, mine will.
Your's! ha! ha! ha! a highwayman preaching
mercy and charity. What has the Devil to do with the
pater-noster?
Nothing, that I know of, said Paul, gravely.
Or you with morality and a feeling heart?
Humph! I can't boast much of either.
Then out she goes.
No; that's a mistake, as I have already said.
Am I the mistress of this miserable hovel or not?
You are.
Then I will do as I please here.
Not always.
Why not?
Because I am master of both you and the
miserable
hovel, replied the other sternly.
During this dialogue Paul had seated himself upon
the foot of the bed, and was proceeding leisurely to
undress
himself. His last remark completely silenced
the enraged woman, who, however, gave him a glance
which superseded the necessity of wasting words. Paul
observed it, and having read that book often, was at no
loss to understand its meaning: he therefore thought
it prudent to allay the storm while brewing, rather than
encounter it in its fury. He proceeded in a more
conciliating
tone
Man seldom becomes so debased, as to be wholly
deprived of the feelings of humanity.
True.
And woman, as long as the milk of human
kindness
flows from her bosom, no matter how great the
account between heaven and herself, is an idol for man
to worship.
Very fine: but what's that to me?
It goes to prove that I still love you, for I know
you have a feeling heart.
Pshaw! come round to the point. Who is this
wench?
Miriam Grey.
I have heard of her. And you would have her
stay here to-night?
She appears feeble and sick; and might perish, if
turned out to wander in the storm.
Well; her death would not be at my door.
No; but certainly on your conscience.
Conscience, mercy, and charity! exclaimed
Madge, with a sneer; the man is better calculated
for the pulpit than the highway. Well; you shall be
obeyed; I will make her a bed in the adjoining room
by the fire.
Right, my brave girl! Faith, I love you now better
than ever, for woman never looks so much like an
angel
as when administering to the wants of a fellow
being.
There was but little of the angel in the appearance
of Madge, or painters have flattered the sublimated
race outrageously; still, she believed there was both
justice and sincerity in the remark of Paul.
You have a flattering tongue, said she, and if
you please to wheedle, I can refuse you nothing.
So, the storm has fortunately gone by, said our
hero to himself, as Madge entered the adjoining room
to prepare a bed for the sick woman; but Paul, with
all his observation, had not yet discovered that usually
a dead calm prevails throughout nature, immediately
preceding the most violent tempest. Madge rebuilt
the fire upon the hearth, and prepared a bed for the
unhappy girl, who appeared to be too much engrossed
with her own feelings to attend to the movements of
her hostess. The bed being finished, Madge wished
her `good night,' and withdrew into her own room and
assumed a smile which was as welcome to Paul as the
face of the sun to the mariner, who, from the gathering
clouds, had prepared himself to encounter a war of the
elements.
It was broad daylight the following morning when
our hero awoke, and after stretching himself, he
started
up in the bed and exclaimed, Zounds, Madge, I
have overslept myself, but as no answer was
returned
,
he looked around, and discovered that his fair
partner was not quite as much of a sluggard as
himself
.
She had already arisen and left the room. Paul
dressed himself, and on entering the room in which
Miriam had slept, discovered that she also had
disappeared
.
He called aloud, but no answer was returned.
He opened the door, but there was no sign of either of
the fugitives. What the Devil is the meaning of all
this, said Paul to himself, as he took a seat, and
began
to cogitate, in hopes of resolving the mystery;
but the more he thought, the more he became
perplexed
,
and he finally abandoned it in despair, and
exclaimed
,
I might as well attempt to find out the longitude
as the motive of a woman's actions: so if she has
gone, even let her go, and the Devil go with her, for
he has got his due, and I am fairly rid of a termagant.
Such is the plastic and accommodating nature of
the human mind, that man will become reconciled to
any affliction or privation which heaven in its wisdom
may deem proper to impose; and to such an extent
has this praiseworthy resignation been carried in
modern
times, that it is not unusual to see a tender
husband
following his beloved wife to the grave with
cheerfulness
;
and a young widow, turning to her dower to
console herself for the loss of her aged spouse; a
brother
beholding, with christianlike calmness, the ruin
of a brother; and a dutiful son, in the fulness of his
grief, dancing with all his might, like the man after
God's own heart, upon the tomb of his wealthy
parent.
Paul had no sooner become reconciled to his loss
than he was under the necessity of calling upon his
philosophy again, to aid him in a more arduous trial.
He had resolved to take his final departure from the
spot, and forget Mistress Haines forever; but at the
moment he rose to put this resolution into execution
she entered, with her skinny face crimpled into what
she considered an engaging smile, but it must be
admitted
,
that those who are familiar alone with the
laughing dimples of a rosy-cheeked Hebe, would have
been at a loss to comprehend the peculiar expression
of Madge's countenance. Paul looked rather abashed
at this ill-timed apparition, for his mind fell headlong,
as it were from a pinnacle to a bottomless pit, and he
would not have felt half as foolish had he been taken
in the act of picking a pocket. He was prepared for
her loss, but not for her recovery, and in evident
confusion
he stammered out
You are stirring early, mistress; what business
could have taken you abroad at this hour of the
morning
?
I have been to the next neighbour's, to provide a
breakfast for you, replied Madge.
Considerate girl! Well, how have you succeeded?
I will not speak as to the quality of the fare, but
you will have enough to digest, I warrant you, she
replied, at the same time placing the half consumed
brands which lay promiscuously about the hearth
together
.
Right, exclaimed Paul, homely fare is the best
suited to a wholesome stomach; but be stirring, the
sun is high, and I should have been on the road at
least an hour ago.
You are always impatient to leave me, in spite of
all I can do to detain you.
No, on my life, sweet Madge, but pleasure you
know must give place to business, or I would not be
absent a moment from this delightful spot.
If so, you will not deny me the pleasure of your
company half an hour longer?
Certainly not, certainly not, said Gordon, at the
same time resolving that it should be the last favour
she should have an opportunity of requesting of him.
He was anxious to know what had become of Miriam,
but feared to broach the subject.
You are already equipped for starting; pray, put
down your arms, for it appears as if you begrudged me
the few moments you stay with me.
You shall be gratified every way, replied Paul,
taking off the belt by which his pistols were secured,
and laying the weapons upon the table.
I will put them out of sight, for they only serve to
remind me that I am to lose you in a few moments,
said Madge, and carried them into the adjoining
room.
How fond the hussy is of me, said Paul to
himself
;
and he felt an unusual degree of self-importance,
as the idea came across his mind. How fond the
hussy is of me. It is a nice point, and still unsettled,
whether man or woman is possessed of the greater
portion of vanity.
Madge immediately returned, and standing behind
the chair upon which Paul was seated, began to fondle
upon him.
You are loving, you rogue; you are loving.
What fools we women are for our pains, said
Madge, one half the trouble that we take to secure
an old lover would obtain us twenty new ones. This
was accompanied by a kiss, and our hero turned up the
whites of his eyes; put on a gracious smile, and
endeavoured
to look as fascinating as a man could
possibly
look in such a dilemma. His arms were
suspended
over the back of the chair upon which he was
seated, and his hands were twined within each other.
Madge slyly slipped a noose over both hands while in
this position,
What frolic are you about? cried Paul, gaily, as
she drew the cord tight around his wrists.
As I have lost all hold upon you, replied Madge,
laughing, I have taken the surest mode of securing
you for the future.
A merry joke, faith; a merry joke; but, zounds,
you hurt my wrists; don't draw the cord so tight, my
angel. Damn it, I say, don't draw the cord so tight.
You are surely jesting, said the other, you can
release yourself from these fetters as easily as you
have from mine.
For all that, sweet Madge, devil a peg can I stir.
Are you quite sure of that?
As sure as I am my name is Paul Gordon.
Then I will call some one to your assistance.
Hallo! the lion's in the toil. The door was burst
open, and three or four countrymen rushed in, armed
with guns, and in their rear the valiant corporal Drone,
flourishing his rusty sword.
Down with the Philistine, cried the corporal;
shoot him; strike, and spare not. The guns were
instantly presented towards the breast of the
highwayman
,
who attempted in vain to rise, as the false
Delilah
exercised all her strength to keep him stationary.
Hold! cried his betrayer, spare his life, he is
perfectly secure.
Sampson has lost all his hair, cried the corporal,
then let me at him.
Gadfly, begone! Traitress, let go your hold that
I may tread him out.
Gordon made a violent exertion to rise, and sprang
to his feet, his hands still secured behind him. The
corporal slunk back, not emulous of being the first to
encounter his fury, should he by possibility regain his
freedom; but in his retreat he called loudly upon the
others to advance and secure him. Paul rushed
towards
the adjoining room.
Do not let him enter there, cried Madge, or
he will escape, saying which, she threw her gaunt
figure between him and the door.
Out of the way, you treacherous hag, or I will
trample your lights out, shouted Paul.
He pressed upon her, a struggle ensued, and the
woman in order to escape his fury darted into the
adjoining
room, but before she could close the door, Paul
followed and dashed it to after him. The next moment
the falling of a heavy bar was heard, and the
countrymen
on trying the door found it secured.
Cowards! cried the corporal, you have
suffered
him to escape. Had I attempted to take him alone
this would not have happened. But I am rightly served.
This comes of trusting to others to do what I could
have done myself, saying which, he strutted about the
room in as great a huff as did a certain distinguished
character, who has been likened unto `a roaring lion,'
on a memorable occasion.
Help, help! cried the woman from within, or
he will murder me.
Break open the door, shouted the corporal, and
they battered against it with the butts of their guns,
while Madge continued to cry for assistance.
Run round the house, cried the corporal, and
if he will not surrender, shoot him through the
window
.
Two were about to obey this order, when they were
arrested by the report of a pistol in the adjoining room,
which was succeeded by a heavy fall upon the floor.
He has murdered the woman, cried the corporal.
Down with the door, I say.
The bar across the door was now raised, the door
flew open, and Madge came forth, her hair and apparel
in great disorder, that indicated the violence of the
struggle she had encountered. In her left hand she
held Paul's belt with a pistol in it, and in the other the
remaining pistol, which was still reeking from the
recent
discharge. The countrymen rushed into the
room, and found Paul upon the floor. He had
succeeded
VOL. II.14
in raising himself upon his knees, and was
about springing to his feet as they entered, but they
pointed the muzzles of their guns to his broad and
bloody chest, and he remained in that attitude without
attempting to rise. His hands were still bound behind
him.
Fire, cried Paul, if you please; and he fixed
his unwavering eyes fiercely upon his captors.
Shoot him down, cried the corporal, peeping in at
the door.
Spare his life, cried Madge, approaching, you
can secure him now.
Hell-cat, begone! shouted Paul, and sprung to
his feet. Madge retreated, and the corporal withdrew
his head.
Surrender, or we fire, cried one of the
countrymen
.
Then fire, for that were a more welcome death than
upon the gibbet.
Spare his life, repeated Madge, for what have
you to fear from a wounded man with his hands tied?
The devil's dam has turned oracle, said Paul, in
bitter irony; what have you to fear from one whom a
woman mastered?
They laid hold of him, and he suffered himself to be
secured without further resistance. They now opened
his bosom to examine the state of his wound, and
discovered
that the ball had passed through the fleshy
part of the right breast, and grazed the right arm near
the shoulder.
The wound is not fatal, I hope, said Madge.
Well aimed, devil, but not fatal, replied Paul.
Come, cover up the scratch the hell-cat gave me,
and let us begone.
Paul, you know I would not have fired, had it not
been to save my life, said Madge, in a penitent tone.
And that alone saved it, replied Paul; but for that,
you should not have triumphed in your treachery,
The corporal, perceiving that there was now no
danger
,
ventured to come forward, and after reconnoitring
the captive for some time, was amazed on recognizing
in the terror of the country his quondam acquaintance
Jones. He gazed in mute astonishment, with eyes and
mouth both open, and seemed to question the evidence
of his own senses, but when fully satisfied that it was
no illusion, he exclaimed
Damn it, Jones, and is it you after all who have
keen kicking up such a confounded dust that no man
could travel the highway with comfort! But give us
your hand, old boyI am heartily glad to see you, for
months have elapsed since we have had a social cup
together. Give us your hand.
Drone took him familiarly by the hand, and he of
whom the whole neighbourhood had for months stood
in awe, was now divested of his terrors even in the eyes
of the cowardly corporal.
By the beard of Aaron, continued Drone, if I
had but known that honest Jones was the bugbear all
this while, I should have settled the hash long ago.
Truly has it been said, that no man is a hero to his valet
de chambre.
The corporal took Paul's belt from the woman, and
buckling it around his waist, strutted fiercely about the
room, issuing his orders to the countrymen, and
occasionally
exclaiming, If I had but known that this
fearless
desperado had been no other than my
pot-companion
Jones, I should have settled his business in short
order.
Even Paul smiled at the consequential airs of the
corporal, as he strutted about in Ephraim's plain coat,
begirt with the highwayman's belt and pistols. To
complete
the anomaly, a long sword was hanging by his
side, and portions of his tattered rifle shirt were seen
beneath his anti-warlike apparel. They finally
concluded
to lodge the prisoner in Chester county jail,
and they left the cottage with that intent, the corporal
walking beside Paul, and chatting familiarly with him.
CHAPTER XI.
That form of seraph sweetness, where the eye enraptur'd gazed,
Is a piteous wreck in its loveliness, for the lost one's brain is
crazed.
Twere better she were sleeping, within the silent tomb;
Oh, never more to her frenzied eye, the flowers of life shall
bloom.
Wetmore
.
The
morn arose brightly after the storm, and the
elements that had contended like fiends during the
gloom of night, now smiled as sweetly as a wearied
child. The sky was clear, the sun was bright, and
the bracing north wind was scarcely audible as it
played
among the ice-covered groves and swept over the
encrusted plains. Paul's cottage was surrounded by
a wood, through which there ran a horse-path leading
to the Lancaster road. Along this path the corporal,
mounted upon Paul's horse, directed the steps of the
prisoner, who was guarded by the two stoutest of the
countrymen, and the others with Madge followed
promiscuously
in the rear. Drone chattered familiarly
with Paul, and reminded him of his inhospitable
reception
the preceding night at the Crooked Billet, and
concluded by protesting that if he had only known his
man, the business should have been settled on the
spot. Paul, however, made no reply to the boasting
corporalnot even by a look, or a contemptuous curl
of the lip, but he moved on gloomily, with his eyes
fixed upon the path along which he travelled.
They were still in sight of the cottage, when Madge,
who had deviated slightly from the path, uttered an
exclamation of horror, upon which the corporal
commanded
the guards to halt, and then he rode to the
spot where the woman stood in violent agitation, and
beheld a spectacle calculated to make even his
uncouth
feelings shudder. At the root of a lofty oak
lay the dead body of a new-born babe, half covered
with fallen leaves and snow. They had scarcely
recovered
from the first shock occasioned by this
discovery
,
when the figure of a female was seen, at a short
distance, slowly moving through the wood, as if she
wished to escape observation. One of the countrymen
went in pursuit of her, and as he approached, her feet
refused their office, and she fell to the ground,
exclaiming
Have mercy! I did not murder it; I did not
murder
it!
The countryman seized hold of her.
O! whither would you take me! For pity's sake
do not drag me so. I tell you the little innocent lives
yet. It was very cold, and I feared that it would freeze
to death, and so I covered it to keep it warm. Come
with me, and I will show you where it is sleeping
sweetly.
You must answer this before a judge of the court,
cried the countryman. Stand up, you baggage.
Alas! I am too weak to stand, but I will crawl to
the spot where the cherub sleeps. This way; follow
me, but tread lightly, lest you break its slumbers.
This way; this way.
Stand up, I say, repeated the countryman, and
dragged her to her feet. She stood for a few moments,
and then sunk to the earth again. It is a trait in
human
nature, that as soon as a fellow mortal is accused
of a crime, to consider him beyond the pale of
humanity
,
and deserving of all the indignity and odium
attendant upon a full and open conviction of guilt. The
14*
world usually prejudges and condemns, without going
to the trouble to distinguish the accused from the
criminal
,
and too frequently the most unfounded charge
proves sufficiently venomous to poison the public mind,
and crush the brightest reputation. Corporal Drone
by this time came up, and recognising Miriam,
interceded
in her behalf, and rescued her from the insults
of the countryman.
The remainder of the party drew nigh from motives
of curiosity, and Gordon could not conceal his
emotion
as he rivited his dark gray eyes upon the miserable
being before him. His feelings did not escape the
notice of the jealous Madge, who exclaimed
scornfully
,
and with an air of triumph
There is your dirty trull: why don't you go
comfort
her now? And is this the wicked drab that I was
slighted for? Heaven mend the taste of some people,
but dirt will mix with dirt, in spite of every thing.
Peace! thou foul-mouthed hag, cried Paul, for
her greatest crimes had less of guilt in them than your
brightest virtues; but woman cannot feel compassion
for the fallen of her own sex.
But you have a large share of compassion for the
whole of us, it seems, returned the other, scornfully;
well, it comes in good time, for you stand in need of
compassion yourself at present. Our knight of the
post turned from her, with all the dignity that a
gentleman
of his nice feelings could call to his aid under such
embarrassing circumstances.
The corporal raised the sick woman from the ground;
she made two or three steps, but unable to support
herself
,
sunk exhausted in his arms, and scarcely
articulated
For mercy's sake, let me lie down and die: I wish
to die, for I am no longer fit to live. But take care of
the little babe when I am gone, for it is a sweet babe.
Make a litter of saplings, said Paul, upon which
you can carry her to my old friend, Ephraim Horn's
house, about a mile from this. One of the
countrymen
was about returning to Gordon's cottage to get an
axe, for the purpose of making the litter, when Paul
added, Bring a few blankets with you, for the poor
girl's situation requires every tenderness.
Very fine, upon my life! but the devil a piece of
blanket shall go out of my house, exclaimed Madge,
in a shrill key, at the same time making use of
appropriate
gesticulation.
You will let me have covering for my babe, said
Miriam, in a supplicating tone. I care not for
myself
I
can bear the cold, but the poor little innocent,
I fear, may take harm.
Bring the blankets, I say, repeated Paul, and
do you hear, pillows too, for they will be needed.
How kind and considerate! said Miriam. I
will bring the babe to thank you. He lies sleeping
at the foot of yon tree. I covered him up warm,
lest the cold should reach him. Let us steal softly
there, and see how sweetly he sleeps.
Madge again protested against converting her
property
to such a use, until the corporal interfered with
the loud voice and strong arm of authority, when her
objections were silenced, and the countryman
immediately
procured all that had been called for. It is
remarkable
,
how much more imperative the voice of
authority
is than that of mercy. The litter was speedily
made, and the unhappy girl, with the dead body of her
child, were placed upon it, and they slowly commenced
their march towards the residence of Ephraim Horn.
Miriam nustled the child in her bosom, and covered it
up.
How cold it is! she said. Poor little sufferer!
it chills me to the very heart, but I will warm it yet.
She sang a lullaby, and hugging the child closer to her
bosom, rocked her body as if she designed to put it to
sleep. A few minutes after, she uncovered her bosom,
and held the child to it.
What are you doing? said Madge, who was
walking
beside the litter, and had observed her movements
for some time; Cover yourself, or you will take your
death of cold.
The poor thing must be fed, said Miriam, but
it is strange it will not take the breast.
Cover yourself, said Madge, whose rugged
feelings
were touched. Cover yourself, she repeated,
and threw the blanket over her bosom.
You doubtless are a mother, said Miriam. Can
you tell why the child refuses the breast.
Ephraim was a substantial farmer; his large stone
house and outbuildings indicated the wealth of their
possessor, and the comforts of those who resided
within
their walls: but thick walls, though they keep out
the weather and unwelcome visiters, do not
unfrequently
exclude humanity, and all compassion for the
sufferings of others.
As the corporal and his company approached the
house, through a long avenue of lofty trees, he
ejaculated
This is comfortable! my ideas, to a hair, on the
subject of domestic happiness, and when my country
shall no longer require my services, I shall seat myself
down like friend Ephraim here, and enjoy the remnant
of a life of successful enterprise.
The corporal moved on in silence, big with the
conceit
of his importance, until he arrived under the porch
of the mansion, when he paused for a moment, and
taking a survey of the premises, said
Well, Paul is right; this is the place to obtain the
necessary relief for that suffering woman; and
accordingly
he knocked at the door with rather more
authority than wisdom. Having waited a few minutes
and no answer being returned, he repeated his
summons
with redoubled vigour, determined to make
himself
heard; and Ephraim shortly after appeared,
unlocked
the door, passed through, and closed it after
him.
Well, friend, thee makes a great deal of
unnecessary
noise; what is thy business with me?
Charity, replied the corporal, pointing at the
litter.
Ephraim raised his eyes, paused for a moment, and
then said
Thee should have gone to the door the other side
of the house, and not have put me to all this trouble
for nothing.
I have knocked at the wrong door, sure enough,
thought the corporal; and then resuming his
confidence
,
proceededas this young woman is sorely
afflicted, I came to ask of you some means of
conveyance
.
And where would thee take her to, friend?
It behoves us to take her to prison, replied the
corporal.
Then it behoves the law to provide a mode of
conveyance, said Ephraim, gravely.
You are right, answered the corporal, but
christian charity should be extended by the mightiest
of mankind, even to the most fallen of God's
creatures
.
Charity begins at home, responded Ephraim.
And your's is likely to remain there, said
Gordon
,
taking a step or two from the crowd, towards
Ephraim, who shrunk back in dismay at his approach.
Well, friend Horn, continued the corporal, as
you have refused to grant me a trifling favour, I have
a small demand to make as a right. Here is your
advertisement
offering a reward of five pounds, hard
money
,
for the apprehension of Paul Gordon; and here,
in my custody, you behold that alarming personage.
Saying which, he took the advertisement from his
pocket and commenced reading it.
What thee says is all very true, replied Ephraim,
coolly: but before I pay the reward Paul must be
prosecuted to conviction.
The corporal's countenance suddenly fell from the
height of expectation to the depth of disappointment,
and he remained gazing at the quaker in silent
astonishment
.
By this time Horn's wife had come to the
door; a tallow-faced personage, with a clean
long-eared
cap, who made up in rotundity her deficiency in
longitude.
Ephraim, what is it these people would have?
inquired his wife, taking a survey of the company; and
on being informed she approached the litter, where the
wretched Miriam lay, almost unconscious of what was
passing around her. As I live, it is the impure one
we cast from our house but yesterday:good friends
begone; her presence is painful and offensive to the
eyes of the undefiled.
Then afford us the means of conveying her out of
your sight, replied the corporal.
Hence, thou reviler, cried Ephraim, for it is
written, `the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.'
Well, we wish to get out of your congregation as
soon as possible, observed the pertinacious Drone.
He revileth, yea, verily, and his words are
abomination
to my ears, exclaimed the fat wife of lean
Ephraim.
The devil they are; your eyes are offended with
the sight of wretchedness; and your ears abominate
a petition of charity:which way are you travelling;
up or down, old lady?
He is one of the scornful, Ephraim, come in and
hearken not to his voice; for like the blighted willows
on the banks of the Jordan
I am not a blighted willow, and I was never on
the banks of the Jordan in my life.
On which the children of Israel hung their harps
and wept, continued the old lady, with a strong nasal
twang.
This is nothing to the purpose, interrupted the
corporal; will you lend me a conveyance, or will you
not?
We will praise the Lord, for he hath dealt
bountifully
with us, continued Mrs. Horn, but the good
things of this world are for the righteous, and not the
unclean.
Leave off canting, and give a plain answer, yes
or no.
No, said Ephraim, and turned on his heel.
We will not lend our weakness to strengthen the
enemies of the Lord, canted forth his wife, and
followed
his example.
Then go in, cried the corporal, and worship
Dagon and the golden calf.
Thou art a sinful reviler.
Moses and mammon; Aaron and his rod.
Hear how he blasphemes; verily his voice
offendeth
mine ear.
The locusts of Egypt; the frogs and the
bullrushes
.
Verily, Satan moveth his lips.
Jephthah and his daughter; Sampson and the
Philistines.
We will shun the presence of the scoffer.
Balaam and his ass; Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego.
The corporal pursued Ephraim and his wife with a
shower of words until they closed the door in his face;
he then took a survey of the house from the roof to
the foundation, and said
High walls keep out charity, and may your
niggardly
souls have a fine crop of grass before your
inhospitable doors.
They took up the litter again, and proceeded to a
farm house about half a mile distant. As Miriam was
too unwell to be removed she was left there to recover
strength, and the corporal proceeded with Paul to
prison.
CHAPTER XII.
There she lies,
The daughter of affliction! whelm'd with woes
So vast, humanity trembles to think her
Of its own species.
Hecuba, a tragedy
.
Not Phbus with his art, or all the drugs
Of Thessaly can ease my grief; the sea
Knows no such straight as I now labour in.
A Fine Companion
.
In
a few days Miriam was removed to the jail of
Chester county, whither Gordon had been previously
conveyed. She had been kindly treated at the farm
house, and her mind was now restored to a full sense
of her condition. There would have been relief in
insanity
.
Towards the close of the day after her removal
to prison, a horseman muffled up in a cloak, apparently
more closely than the piercing wind required, rode up
to the prison, dismounted, and knocked at the door.
This summons was immediately succeeded by the
rattling
of keys and the creaking occasioned by the
unbolting
of bars, when the door was opened, and the
turnkey demanded why he had been summoned.
A friend would speak with Miriam Grey; can you
grant his request?
It is now the hour of closing up; if you had come
sooner
I would but speak a few words to her, replied the
stranger, to let her know that she is not forgotten.
Even that will be a solace to one afflicted as she is.
It will, so come in, said the jailer, for the poor
thing needs to be comforted.
The stranger entered, the door was barred after him,
and he followed the jailer in silence to the room where
the wretched Miriam lay, and the door being opened,
he stood in the passage for a few moments
contemplating
the scene that it presented to his view. On a
bed in one corner of the room lay the miserable girl,
whose figure was scarcely visible, by the feeble light
of a lamp placed on the hearth. In another corner was
a small rough table, upon which stood an earthen
pitcher and some broken bread. Miriam raised her
head as the door opened, and on perceiving that tall
lank figure of the jailer, faintly said
Mr. Foster, is that you? It is kind, for you
cannot
think how weary I am of hearing no human voice!
Here is one would speak with you, replied the
jailer, raising his lamp, the light from which fell upon
the muffled figure standing behind him; Miriam caught
a glimpse of it, and shrinking with fear, exclaimed
Ah! what man is that? Why is he here? Have
they sent already to drag me to trial? I am innocent
I have told you over and over again I am innocent.
As God is my witness, I am no murderer.
Be pacified, said Foster, in a soothing tone, you
have nothing to alarm you yet.
She concealed her face in her hands, and sobbed
O! do not take me to trial yet; spare me but this
one night, for I may die before to-morrow, and they
will not have to answer for my blood.
Raise your head, Miriam, for none but friends are
near you, replied the stranger.
Friends! I have no friends! Even heaven itself
has forsaken me!
The stranger approached the bed, and called her
again by name. At the sound of his voice she raised
VOL. II.15
her eyes, and after gazing wildly at him for a few
moments
,
uttered a piercing shriek, and fell senseless upon
his bosom.
The surprise has overcome her, said the stranger.
Bring the water, Foster, and bathe her temples.
The jailor brought the pitcher from the table, and the
stranger bathed the pallid face of the unconscious
Miriam
,
who slowly revived.
Miriam, Miriam, be collectedThey are friends
who are with you.
That voiceI know that voice, she faintly said,
but then it sounds so hollow! It is no longer clear and
full as in former days. Speak to me again; I cannot
have been deceived.
Miriam!
It is he! But wherefore is he here? How did he
escape? And no sooner free than to rush upon ruin
for my sake! Wherefore have you done this?
Silence, Miriam, we are not alone, said Jurian in
a low voice, for it was he.
Braved an ignominious death for my sake! A thing
so worthless!
Be composedyour emotion will betray me.
A joy so unlooked for! Praise to heaven, I am
not deserted yet!
Good Foster, said Jurian, turning to the jailor,
can you leave us together? I would speak alone with
her.
He will not refuse, said Miriam, for he has been
so kind to me, you cannot think how kind.
May heaven reward him!
The jailor took his lamp and withdrew, leaving the
door partly open, and the room was now imperfectly
lighted by the dim lamp on the hearth. The wretched
pair remained silent for some moments, during which
Miriam examined with interest the altered countenance
of her lover.
How pale you are! she said; and your cheeks
are hollow. That blue vein across your forehead, that
once added beauty and expression to your countenance,
is now swollen and painful to behold. How fearfully
that dark line contrasts with the waxen hue of your
skin! And your eyes too, Jurian, that once sparkled
with a fire that I imagined death alone could extinguish,
are now as the eyes of one that is dead.
True, they are dead, and buried too, my Miriam,
he replied, forcing a smile, deep sunken in my head.
O! do not smile! what is it has wrought this
fearful
change?not sorrow for me, I hope. Let me not
believe that I have done this. Cease to think of me,
Jurian, or if you needs must think, only remember me
as I was, and not as I am. That thought will not bring
you pain.
They are united, Miriam, by a link never to be
broken.
This is madness! What comfort will it afford me
to know that you are wretched? It is enough for one
to suffer, and if there be any virtue in penitence, surely
what I have endured should be sufficient to expiate our
crime. There is no hope for me, Jurian, in this world,
then why should two lives be sacrificed? It is enough,
I say, that one should feel condemned in the eye of
heaven for an offence committed against the laws of
man.
Speak no more of it. Think not of me.
What else have I to think of on earth! and when
I behold this change can I do otherwise than speak?
But a few weeks have passed since we parted, and
your frame has wasted awayyour voice is so hollow
that I scarcely recognise its familiar tones,and your
handsbehold those swollen veins, attenuated fingers,
and discoloured nails!it is the hand of age already.
Too much thought has made me ill, Miriam, since
we parted.
You must have been very ill to have produced so
great a change!
Doubtless, and yet I knew it not. She brought
the light, and examined his countenance intently
What new lines are here! Familiar as that face
is to me, I never before beheld those lines. Your hair
has lost its gloss, it no longer curls as formerly, and
gracious heavens! it is sprinkled with gray!
I knew not that. Put down the light, Miriam, put
down the light. She did so, and reseated herself
beside
him
Were you not formerly acquainted with Foster?
I was, replied Jurian; I knew him well. You
remember but a few years ago he lived in our
neighbourhood
.
I remember.
Then wherefore the question?
I thought it strange that he did not recognise you,
but even I did not know you at first, which was more
strange.
The conversation was now changed, and Jurian
related
the manner of his escape from his place of
confinement
at the Valley Forge. The evening preceding,
Alice Grey called at the hut in which he was confined,
and demanded of the guard permission to see her son.
Honest Talman was on duty, and though he had
discontinued
the habit of smoking ever since the
destruction
of his meerschaum, it was remarked that on this
occasion he had a pipe in his mouth; the same that
Jurian had bestowed upon him years before. He also
abounded in anecdote of the juvenile adventures of our
hero, and if they did not appear more remarkable than
were ever before performed by infant prodigy, it was
not the fault of the partial narrator. Poor Mauns was
not in the habit of talking much, but when on this
theme, he would talk until his own eyes overflowed,
and those of his hearers were closed, for there was
scarcely a wild duck or a rockfish taken by Jurian,
whose fate did not call forth the most minute
description
.
Actions trifling in themselves, assume an aspect
of importance when connected with one in whom we
feel an interest.
The wishes of Alice were no sooner made known to
the sergeant than complied with. She entered the hut,
and Mauns sat smoking at the door, the pipe, that
through the misfortunes of the donor, had become
dearer to him than ever was his favourite meerschaum.
A few minutes after Alice had entered, Jurian came
forth enveloped in her cloak; it was the dusk of the
evening, and the sergeant being too single-minded to
suppose that any thing like deception would be
practised
,
satisfied himself with casting his eye on the
figure, and perceiving the same dress, felt persuaded
that all was well, while Jurian passed on to a spot
beyond
the limits of the camp, where he found M`Crea,
with a horse and cloak, in waiting, who directed him
to fly and conceal himself, until such time as he might
appear in safety, assuring him that when the extent of
his offence should be fully known, he did not doubt
that all proceedings against him would be discontinued.
The first use he made of his liberty was to visit Miriam,
whose fate he had learnt from M`Crea.
Then my mother is still alive! exclaimed Miriam,
as he ceased speaking; but driven from her home to
wander through a scoffing world, with a daughter's
shame added to her own sorrowsshe cannot bear it
long, and I shall have murdered her. That thought
will kill me yet. O! Jurian, does she still think of me
with kindness, or as a wretch who had doubly imbittered
the last hours of a life of sorrow?
She loves you as her child, and nothing but the
hope of seeing you sustains her beneath her load of
calamity.
How had I the heart to forsake so good a mother!
And yet, Jurian, even she has been cruel to mebut
her cruelty was meant in kindness. When I last parted
from you, I met her at the prison door, with Gordon
that wicked man, whose arts have destroyed my
happiness
15*
in this world. They were deaf to my entreaties,
and forced me along the street to where my mother
lodged. Gordon then left me alone with my mother,
and she spoke not until he returned. O! Jurian, there
was the concentrated agony of a whole life, in the few
moments that I sat silent and self-condemned in the
presence of my mother. I dared not to raise my eyes
until Gordon returned. There was a man with him, a
clergyman they said, who had come to make me the
wife of him whom most on earth I abhorred.
And you are now the wife of that guilty man?
That curse is spared me! Heaven gave me strength
to avoid that misery. Three times, Jurian, was the
ceremony repeated, while my mother stood calmly by,
without a sign of mercy in that face that hitherto had
beamed alone with tenderness and love. My soul sunk,
still I summoned all my strength to answer when the
fearful question was proposed, and thrice I shrieked,
`death sooner! death sooner!' Finding me resolute,
Gordon and the clergyman left us, and my mother used
every argument to convince me that the step was for
my own salvation. Three days I was confined, during
which her entreaties were unceasing; threats were
resorted
to, and the following day was fixed upon for the
consummation of my fate, but that very night means
of escape occurred, and I availed myself of it; whether
for the better or the worse it is hard to tell.
Had you remained, Miriam, we might have been
spared an accumulation of suffering and guilt.
O suffering, but not of guilt. Since that time, I
have led a life of sincere penitence, and not of guilt. O!
no, I have done nothing but weep and pray, but even
when my thoughts were most free from sin, I am
supposed
to have been most guilty.
The child, Miriam, the child?
You cannot think me such a wretch! If you can
doubt my innocence, what have I to hope from my
judges?
Miriam!
Jurian, you have known me in my days of purity,
when my heart did not harbour a single thought it
would have concealed from the world. I need not say
how madly I have loved youmore than any thing on
earth, and at times, I fear, more than any thing in
heaven. Then can you think I would have sought the
life of the child of one so beloved, at a time when the
little innocent was all that remained to me of you?
Do not imagine that such a thought could enter my
mind. No, Miriam, I know you are innocent of the
fearful charge, but I would hear from your own lips all
that occurred on that fatal night, that your innocence
may be made manifest to the world.
And wherefore? what is life to me? A name once
deeply stained can never be purified; and it matters
little whether falsehood has stamped the blot, or the
the frailty of human nature has occasioned it. Few
gain credit for their good actions, their evil ones are
never to be forgotten; and though my innocence be
made as clear as noonday, I shall never again raise my
head among those who were the witnesses of my
shame.
Still, Miriam, remember you are about to answer a
fearful charge, and I am here to save you, if possible,
from a death of shame.
True, true, and few have the fortitude not to
struggle
for life, even while they wish for death. I will
recount
to you all that I remember of that dreadful night.
I had been turned from the house where I had sought
shelter, for the mistress of it had discovered my shame,
and had no mercy for the frailties of others, even while
she expected it of heaven for her own. She closed her
doors upon me with revilings, and though I was scarcely
able to stand, and sick to the soul, I dragged my feeble
limbs about a mile from the house, when I sunk
exhusted
upon the ground, where I lay near an hour, and
earnestly did I pray to die. God willed it otherwise.
Night had closed in, a storm was gathering, and there
was every prospect that unless I found shelter my
prayer would be heard before the morning. I have said
we struggle for life even while we pray for death. I
arose, and having been driven from the door of the
prosperous, I determined to appeal to the compassion
of the poor, whose sufferings had taught them to feel
for others. After wandering for some time, the rain
began to fall in torrents, the night was dark, and my
strength had nearly failed, when I was attracted by a
light to Gordon's cottage, and I knocked at the door
and entered. Rather would I have stayed in the wood
and perished than have entered there.
Go on, Miriam, go on.
The woman was at first kind to me, but I had
not been seated long before Gordon came. At the
sight of him I felt ready to die with terror, and
was so feeble and distressed that I could scarcely
move. On the instant the woman's conduct changed
towards me. They retired together, and I fancied I
overheard him mention my name. My fears increased,
and even when left alone to sleep, I could not close my
eyes. Before day the woman passed through the room
where I lay, and left the house. The thought of being
alone with my persecutor awakened my terrors to such
a degree, that I silently arose and crawled into the
wood, preferring any situation to that in which I was.
The exertion was too much for me. I was seized with
racking pains; my brain was wanderingthere was but
one idea that it could grasp, and that was, that I was
hunted by my worst foe. I struggled and writhed in
agony, for I thought he had fastened his fangs upon
me, and was tearing me limb from limb. What I fled
from, I knew not, for all was vague; still there was an
undefined feeling that I contended in mortal strife with
the most appalling creature that imagination could
form. O God! Jurian, what I did suffer on that night!
Long I contended; I thought the strife would never be
over, and was astonished at my own strength that
enabled
me to bear up against the tortures I endured. At
length the agonies of death came over me; I shrieked
it was the only shriek I had utteredit was followed
by a momentary consciousness, and I swooned. How
long I remained in this state I know not, but when I
awoke it was daylight, and I felt as though I were in
heaven. My relief was but momentary, for the first
object that struck my sight was a dead infant beside
me, and madness returned.
As Miriam concluded, Foster again appeared in the
passage, and opened the door of a cell opposite to that
in which she was confined. Jurian turned at the
sound, and both doors being partly open, he caught a
glimpse of Gordon in the opposite room, secured with
shackles. Foster placed a pitcher of water upon the
table, and demanded of the prisoner whether he desired
any thing further, as it was time to lock up for the night.
In good faith, Foster, replied Gordon, you are
too humane by half for your calling, and appear
unwilling
to lose sight of your old acquaintance Jones in the
highwayman Gordon; however, I shall not trouble you
again to-night. As the jailor was about returning,
Gordon perceived Jurian, and demanded of Foster who
he was.
A friend of Miriam's, replied the other, who has
come to consult with her on the subject of her
approaching
trial, and I hope he may be able to make out a good
defence.
Do you know who it is? demanded Gordon,
keeping
his eyes fixed upon the figures in the opposite
room.
He is a stranger to me, replied Foster, though
he bears some resemblance to Jurian Hartfield. I
would have spoken to him for master Jurian, but that
this man is ten years older at least than the other. I
suppose it is some lawyer who intends to undertake the
defence of poor Miriam.
If so, Foster, he will not object to having two
clients, nor I to an additional counsel. Will you
permit
me to say a word to him? for I would secure the
whole bar, and judges and jury too, if it were
practicable
,
for I fear my case will require pretty strong
argument
.
I am for letting every man have a fair chance for
his life, Gordon, and if you think that this gentleman
will be able to throw dust in the eyes of the jury, tell
him your story and set him to work.
Gordon approached the door slowly; he was heavily
ironed, and the clanking of his chains awakened the
attention of Miriam, who recoiled as he approached.
He stood silent in the door-way, and his hard features
denoted something like feeling, as he contemplated the
forlorn state of the miserable girl. Foster intimated
to Jurian that the prisoner wished to speak to him, and
he rose and approached the spot where Gordon stood.
Do not leave me, cried Miriam, clinging to him.
I shall not leave you; but why do you tremble?
The sight of that man recalls all that I have
suffered
.
O do not leave me for an instant; do not speak
to him! He has been the bane of your life, and if
possible
he will sting you to death before he dies. Avoid
him as you would certain ruin.
Be pacified; what have I to fear?
I know not, but the sight of him has stricken such
terror to my soul, that I feel convinced if you speak to
him, you are lost. Your names have already been
linked together, and beware how you give malice
another
hold upon you.
What hold, Miriam?
Remember, he is supposed to be a British spy;
he is about to answer the insulted laws of his country
and your name connected with that of a wretch like
this, under existing circumstances, may prove fatal. He
hates you, and will not die without showing it.
Be it so; but his malice cannot reach me.
Be not so confident, for even the poisonous spider
can weave a powerful web from frail material.
This conversation, though carried on in an
undertone
,
did not escape the quick ear of Gordon, and a
change in his countenance indicated that jealousy and
hate were already contending in his bosom. Jurian
drew nigh to him, and said
You desire to speak to me?
I do, but in any other place than this, I should
almost
question whether you are the man. Can a few
weeks have done the work of years?
Spare your comments, and speak to the point.
I shall be brief, sir, but I cannot refrain from
expressing
my astonishment at this change. I may presume,
from the hazard you have run this night, that you still
love Miriam, and as ardently as ever?
A slight shudder ran through the frame of Jurian,
which he in vain endeavoured to conceal, as the other
fixed his cold gray eye upon him.
Did you call me to catechise me? demanded
Jurian
;
if so, farewell.
Be not so hasty, continued Gordon. Though
you may not love her as ardently as formerly, you
doubtless
have still sufficient regard remaining, to attempt to
rescue her from her impending fate, since even I,
though rather like the blustering November than the
showery April, could weep for her.
Her safety is the object of my visit here.
It can be effecteddraw this way. You are not
aware that the evidence against her is strong enough
to consign her to the gallows. She privately buried
the child, at least so the law will say, and was
absconding
to conceal its death, when apprehended. Trust
not to a jury, or her fate is certain.
What hope has she but in the justice of her cause?
Law and justice will not shake hands in the present
case. But you know the statute better than I can
explain. I remember, some three years ago, Mary
Thorp, though as innocent as her dead babe of the
charge brought against her, was convicted and
sentenced
upon slighter testimony than will appear against
Miriam. You remember poor Mary, therefore trust
not to a jury, I say, while there are means more
certain
.
What means?
The prison is not well guarded, and the door would
soon yield before an axe or two.
Explain yourself.
I have always admired your courage, Mr.
Hartfield
,
and now you have an opportunity of exercising it
to some purpose. You know that the day after
to-morrow
her trial will take place.
I know it, I know it.
Follow my instructions, and in a few hours you
will find yourself at the head of twenty determined men,
and if led on by one of your spirit, the project cannot
fail. To-morrow night attack the prison, and take my
word for it, you will find it a surer way to save Miriam
than trusting to law and justice.
And is it for the sake of that poor girl, or your own,
that I am to mingle with your unprincipled associates?
For both; and surely you cannot refuse to save the
life of one you love, because in doing so you may
possibly
benefit one you hate.
Gordon, I have been your dupe more than once,
but as my conduct heretofore has not been criminal, do
not suppose from what has past, that I am ready to
become the guilty instrument of a wretch so
abandoned
.
Why give way to passion? What I propose is for
your own good. Turn not away, but bethink you, if
she dies, her blood will be upon your soul. Jurian
made no reply, but entered the room where Miriam was
and closed the door after him. And dare the moral
idiot spurn my proposal! exclaimed Gordon in a rage,
but he shall learn that I am not to be so easily foiled
in what I undertake. He dashed his foot violently
against the door, and it flew open.
Come, sir, he continued, old friends should not
part so soon and unceremoniously. I have a word or
two more to say to you, so come and hear me.
Do not stir from me, exclaimed Miriam in
agitation
.
Let it not be said that you communed with
that man in secret here, or utter ruin must follow.
Peace, abandoned girl, exclaimed Gordon, lest
your voice awaken the slumbering devil in my heart.
Come, sir, I would speak to you, I say, and must I call
a second time? You forget you are in my power.
I despise your threats, replied Jurian. Foster,
take that villain to his cell, that we may no longer be
subjected to outrage.
This from one who already has the halter around
his neck! Be warned in time, for there is that within
my bosom, which, if spoken
Begone, and do the worst your malice can suggest.
Has the gallows then no terrors? demanded
Gordon
,
or are you already steeped so deep in infamy, as to
brave an ignominious death with composure? Reflect
upon the course you have adopted: I would be your
friend; be careful how you make me your foe.
Better have him your foe than friend, exclaimed
Miriam, and clung around the neck of the young man.
Girl, replied Gordon, his gray eye kindling with
rage, better that he had been your foe than friend;
but if you have a spark of mercy for yourself or him
remaining, raise not your feeble voice against me.
Miriam shrunk from his gaze, and concealed her face
in Jurian's bosom.
Begone, villain, cried Jurian, and cease to insult
this injured being, or I will strike you prostrate.
The eyes of Gordon flashed for a moment, and
suddenly
all was calm again.
Keep your temper, he said, for neither you nor
myself will profit much by a war of words or blows. In
VOL. II.16
spite of all that has passed, circumstances compel us to
bury our animosity. Again I will ask you to extend the
hand of fellowship, and promise to befriend me. You
know the way I mean.
Never.
Decide not rashly; weigh the matter well and
dispassionately
,
for life or death depends upon your
answer
.
Pause, I say, for you know me well enough to
be convinced that I will not die singly.
You have had your answer; leave the room.
Have you no pity for my condition?
Begone!
No mercy for yourself?
Leave the room, I say.
No compassion for your sister? saying which, he
pointed his finger at Miriam, and the young man
immediately
sprang upon his throat, exclaiming
Infernal fiend! could you not have spared me this?
The struggle was of short continuance, for Jurian's
strength had been reduced by previous sickness, and
the agony of his present feelings soon exhausted it.
Gordon thrust him from him, and he fell to the floor.
His sister! what horrid tale is this! shrieked
Miriam
.
There lies the son of old Alice Grey, replied
Gordon, coolly, at least so the story goes, and he has
received a lesson that will make him a better man for
the future; and should he at any time stand in need of
mercy, he will be ready to extend it towards others.
Miriam stood for a few moments petrified with
horror
,
and then fell senseless upon the body of Jurian.
My errand is performed, continued Gordon,
turning
to Foster. My words are verified; I said I would
not die alone. Think you not the shaft is there, old
boy? and am I not a sure marksman to the last? Now
lead me to my cell, for I grow weary; it is time to rest.
What can all this mean? demanded Foster in
astonishment
.
No matter, for the present, replied Gordon, but
you must admit that he is a good marksman who can
bring down two at a shot; say you not so, old boy?
Then slapping the jailor familiarly on the shoulder, he
entered his cell.
CHAPTER XIII.
Peace: thou hast told a tale, whose every word
Threatens eternal slaughter to the soul.
Ford
.
The
first rays of morning, as they stole through the
grated window, discovered the miserable pair as mute
as statues beside each other. No chiselled marble was
paler, and they were as motionless, settled despair
having
already succeeded the deep agony of grief. Not
a word had passed their lips during that tedious night
of mental suffering, and the dead silence had scarcely
been broken even by a convulsive sob. The shaft was
poisoned with despair, and it no sooner reached the
heart than the death of hope followed without a
struggle
.
When they first awoke to a sense of their
condition
,
after being left alone, the light of the lamp was
insupportable to them, for it served to betray the one
to the other, and they could not withstand each other's
gaze. Jurian arose and extinguished it, and fervently
did they pray, but no words passed their lips, that the
sun might never rise again, and that time henceforth
might become one eternal and starless night. With
anguish did they behold the first rays of the sun
gradually
stealing along the wall, as it dispersed the sense
of loneliness with which the gloom of night had
enveloped
them, and they no longer desired to look upon
a joyous world in which they could not mingle.
Miriam
was the first to break the deep silence that had
prevailed for hours. The sound was an involuntary
ejaculation from the heart, and scarcely audible
It is already day! she sighed. Where shall I
hide myself from the eyes of the world; where from
the sight of heaven!
Miriam, speak to me. Let me hear the sound of
your voice again. This fearful conflict of thought must
be interrupted, or it will terminate in madness. Speak
to me, in pity speak to me.
She turned to him, struggled to speak, and burst
into tears.
Weep on, Miriam, he continued. Thank God
that you can weep, for tears may assuage the anguish
of your heart. O! that I could weep with you.
Have you not wept? Your eyes are red as fire.
And burn like fire; but I cannot weep. I have
not shed one tear. Thought has become as subtle and
scorching as flame, and it seems as if the very fountain
of tears were dried within me. My heart is swoln too
large for my bosom, my eyeballs ache to bursting, and
yet the natural channels that might relieve my anguish
are closed. I have often thought if I could weep I
should feel relieved.
I now no longer wonder at the alteration in your
appearance that I remarked last night.
Incessant thought has wasted my frame away, for
what chance has the body when the mind is struggling
to cast off its earthly fetters! I knew not, until lately,
the mighty attributes of that mercurial essence. They
say that the human form is its dwelling place, and yet
the bounds of the universe are too narrow to confine
it. The elements cannot obstruct its progress, for it
will traverse the world of waters to their uttermost
limits
in an instant, and cleave the highest heaven with
greater rapidity than light itself can travel. No place
is so sacred that it may not enter. It can delve through
the earth to the centre, and hear the groans of the
condemned
;
and it can stray unfettered through the happy
16*
fields above, and at times even the judgment seat of
the Most High appears to be approachable. At least
so it seemed to me; for there methought I have stood,
Miriam, for days together, awaiting my sentence, loth
to depart until judgment should be pronounced upon
me. And so strongly was I impressed with the belief
that it was no hallucination of mind, but that I had
actually
visited the world of spirits, and learnt that I
should there be adjudged with greater clemency than
on earth, that at times my soul has cast off the
mountain
that weighs upon it, and resumed the serenity of
former days.
How can that be!
And wherefore should it not be? It is the
intention
that constitutes the crime, and not the act, for
crimes of the deepest die have been perpetrated, and
passed under the name of virtues. Human sacrifices
have been made to appease the gods of the heathen,
and the judge of Israel offered up his own daughter,
and believed the unnatural sacrifice acceptable to a
merciful Judge. And was he criminal, or was the
appalling
act purged and purified by the deep devotion
that dictated it? If the intent can divest such a deed
of its horror and criminality, and instead of punishment
it is to meet with reward, then surely, Miriam, there
can be no crime in any act, if crime were not intended.
Why reason thus? We are steeped to the lips in
sin, and no sophistry can shake that dreadful
conviction
!
And what is sin, my sister?
O! call me not by that name! Until I am dead,
never breathe that word again.
It shall be buried in my heart, Miriam. But what
do you understand by sin? Are the principles of right
and wrong immutable? Came they into the world when
creation was new, or have they grown out of human
institutions, so that that which was sanctioned and
enjoined
upon man in one age, may become an offence
against heaven in another? If so, and there be no
appeal
from the opinions that now prevail, we are indeed
criminal, but if that race of people, who we are taught
to believe possessed the most immediate knowledge of
the divine law, sinned not with their eyes open, then
Miriam, there is still room for us to hope, for that which
was free from moral guilt at one period, no subsequent
rule that man may prescribe for his conduct can render
otherwise. True, the infringement of those rules may
call forth human punishment, and to keep them
inviolate
,
man in his arrogance may threaten us with divine
vengeance, and impiously lay down a rule of action for
the Creator, but it does not follow that those rules shall
be recognised beyond this world.
Whither would you lead me?
If human laws are to test the degree of moral
turpitude
,
there can be nothing more undefined and
uncertain
in its nature than crime, for that which one
nation sanctions another may condemn, and deeds
which at one period were calculated to paralyze every
hope in heaven, at another may be considered
justifiable
.
Can our crime ever be palliated?
Call it not crimewe are unhappy, but not
criminal
.
We are taught to believe, Miriam, that there was
a period when the natural ties that subsist between us,
would have been so many links to bind us more closely
together. Who was it that solaced Cain in his
wanderings
?
Who was it that Abel took to his bosom?
There are many instances wherein it was pronounced
right that the germ of natural affection should be
permitted
to expand, and that the ties which heaven had
entwined should be strengthened by those which earth
had created. But that is no longer right; and I am
aware that he who credits it has a fearful weight of
human condemnation on him; heavier than mortal can
contend with, but has he also the condemnation of
heaven to oncounter?
O! do not reason thus! You are mad, Jurian!
It is blasphemy to doubt it.
I fear it is; but like a drowning man, Miriam, I
grasp in my desperation even at the bubbles on the
surface
.
I have endeavoured to divest myself of the
prejudices
of education, to turn the mind into a frightful
path that heretofore it trembled to enter, and I have
laboured to extinguish the very light of reason, that I
might not see the inky waters that lay before me, but
I struggle in vain, and like a weary swimmer soon
must sink. O, Miriam, is it not a fearful thing to be
plunged thus in utter despairto meet with execration
here, and condemnation hereafter, for crimes of which
we were unconscious! In trying one accused, by
human
laws, they judge him by the intent, and if the
absence
of evil design be manifest, no matter how
atrocious
the wrong inflicted, but slight stain is left upon
him. Then is it just that we should be utterly
condemned
who knew notIt cannot be possible! We
will not sink yet! Hope, Miriam, hope!
For nothing in this world.
True, there is nothing left us here. Our race is
runbut in the next! Look there, with confidence
look there.
I dare not raise my eyesmy thoughts ascend,
but the weight is so heavy they sink to earth again.
Despair not yet. Let me not see you sink.
Struggle
to bear up. You must not sink.
What have we to hope for?
Every thing to hope, and nothing to lose. Let
not thine eye rest upon earth, or thou canst not fail
being wretched. Look abroad, and thou wilt perceive
that it has been so ordered that even the most abject
may behold more of heaven than earth in his
pilgrimage
.
It matters not whether he stand upon the
mountain
top or in the depth of the valley, still heaven
appears
to him boundless, while the orb he treads upon
is circumscribed.
But in all that boundless space is there one spark
of mercy for me?
Doubt not, Miriam. Bear up, or you are lost.
Suffer not despair to take such full possession of your
soul, that not a spark of hope remains to solace.
It is in vain to struggle, Jurian. Support me; I
would lie down.
How pale you are, and faint! Gracious God! you
are dying!
Not dyingnot yet; but sick to the soul.
Mercy, mercy heaven!
O! that I dare pray!
He supported her to the bed, and she lay down and
covered her face with her hands. He kneeled beside
her, and a few minutes after Foster opened the door of
the cell and ushered in M`Crea. Jurian rose as he
entered, and on recognising the surgeon, he exclaimed
in a deep and hurried tone
It is well, sir, that you have come, that you may
behold how one sin begets another, and witness, before
you die, the last bitter fruits of your own crime. You
have been a prolific source of misery to many, but here
lay your last victims, and earth supports not two so
utterly wretched.
I must answer for my own sins, Jurian, replied
M`Crea; but why am I to be reproached with
your's?
Because they are but fruits of the same tree. Had
you not been criminal, I should have been innocent,
and that polluted one have passed from this world as
spotless as she entered it. To you alone, sir, is to be
attributed our eternal shame and misery.
Add not to the bitterness of the present moment,
by reproaching the gray head of your father with the
errors of his youth, replied M`Crea, with evident
agitation
.
Is it now a time to claim the name of father,
replied
Jurian, when it can be of little moment to you,
and of less to me? We have passed through life, thus
far, as strangers, and have but a few more steps to
travel
,
then where is the use of making a parade at
parting
?
Unfeeling boy! can you disown a penitent parent,
and treat him as a stranger!
Did not that penitent parent disown his son? You
cast me off, from infancy, and yet expect to find a heart
overflowing with filial love, without bearing in mind
that your neglect was calculated to chill every germ of
affection that nature may have implanted in my bosom.
Your kindness never put a pulse in action. The
channels
of natural love, if such there be, were soon
chilled
;
the warm blood never passed through them, and
it is now too late to find the way. That fault rests on
your head, not mine. It is in vain, sir, to trust to
natural
ties when we refuse to create factitious ones, and
too frequently are the latter mistaken for the former, as
I am perfectly satisfied that they do not exist in this
bosom
.
I can readily conceive that there can be no bond
so strong, no friendship so sincere, as that which may
exist between father and son, but then it rests with the
father to create it. Implanted in infancy and growing
with years, it may at times be mistaken for the
mysterious
link by which nature is supposed to connect those
of the same blood, but my heart can recognise no such
tie.
Is it in man's nature to become so depraved, as to
lose all feeling for the author of his being?
True, I owe you life, but look into the extent of
the obligation. I was stigmatized with shame when
first I breathed, and you were the cause. In my
progress
through life that shame has adhered to me as a
consuming leprosy, and there is no cure. It was your
will that I should enter upon the world a proscribed
being; with a ban against me that even the grave
cannot
remove. You foresaw this, and yet cared not. You
curst me at my birth, avoided me through life, and now
expect me to bless you in return. The talismanic word
of father can work no miracle in a heart that has never
experienced a father's love.
O! spare me, my son, exclaimed M`Crea.
Spare me the most humiliating consequence of
crime. A father to be rebuked by his offspringto
have the errors of his youth called up in judgment
against him, until he trembles with shame and remorse;
to have the death-wound torn open and made bleed
anew, by the hands of a son, is unnatural. Spare me
that; and if you knew what I have already endured,
your bitter reproaches would be changed for tears of
compassion.
It may not be expected, replied Jurian, in the
same cold tone, that he who cannot shed a tear for
his own griefs, will weep for those of another. But
why still dwell upon the tie that should exist between
father and son? Let us remove the veil that blinds
your better judgment. Am I indebted for my
existence
to the gratification of your own selfish passions,
or to a holy wish to possess a son in whom your
affections
might concentrate? Assuredly to the former, and
you would have rejoiced if death had removed me from
your sight when I first breathed. I was looked upon
as a foe to your peace. Nature formed no covenant
between us, at least you did not acknowledge it, and
from that hour, through life, we have been as strangers
to each other. Then wherefore should you expect to
find a heart overflowing with natural love for you? As
well might the husbandman who scatters no seed look
for a golden harvest, and complain at finding nothing
but weeds and nettles.
Jurian, I feel in all its force the truth of your
rebuke
.
I have lost a son by my own injustice towards
him, and such a one as would have realized my most
sanguine hopes. But it is not yet too late to redeem
what has past.
It is now too late. As well might you expect
verdure from the tree that the lightning has blasted, as
to revive hope in this bosom. Behold the change that
a few days have effected, and you may conclude that
the cause is deep rooted, and not upon the surface.
And look there, he continued, pointing at Miriam,
who sighed deeply, and sobbed aloud, the storm has
also passed over that delicate flower: think you, will
it ever hold up its head again? No, never in this
world; she has been too cruelly crushed, and there is
no relief but in the grave. Look there, I say; and
can you recall in that forlorn being the once lovely
creature whose joyous voice filled every heart with
gladness? Behold, and reflect that to your errors
may be traced this utter desolation.
To my errors! I am lost in amazement. In what
manner have I wronged her?
Had you been candid to me; had I known to
whom I owed my being, she would still have been
innocent
,
and escaped the accumulation of horror that
now weighs her to the earth. But, no, the secret was
preserved until our ruin was consummated, and then
divulged to show the extent of our guilt, and the
hopelessness
of our fate. Why was it not permitted to die
in the bosom that had sheltered it so long! Why was
it at this time brought to light, and with it the damning
truth that I had laid the crime of incest on my sister's
soul. It would have been mercy to have let us died in
ignorance of this.
Jurian, hear me.
And wherefore? Is it in the power of words to
extenuate your conduct, or mitigate my crime? If not,
it is but idle waste of breath to speak. Go, and leave
us.
Hear me, I say. Your offence does not assume
the frightful aspect you imagine, for she is not your
sister.
Merciful heaven! say on.
I repeat it; she is not the child of Alice Grey, who
is at hand to attest the truth of what I now assert.
Can this be true! Miriam, hearest thou the words
he has spoken? Thou art not my sister. Arise from
the bed of eternal death, to new life, my Miriam, for
thou art not my sister.
The poor girl sobbed as if her heart were breaking,
while Jurian continued
Be comforted, for if this prove true, we shall be
relieved of more than half our wretchedness.
I know not what to think, she replied. My
brain is bewildered, and like a troubled sleeper, I but
pass from one horrid dream to another.
But thou hearest, thou art not my sisterthat
frightful dream is over. Awaken thy mind to a full
sense of that truth, and it will inspire you with new
life, and give you courage to bear what remains.
Yes, thank God, that dream is overa dream that
I feared would disturb even the repose of the grave.
But how is it over! Are we awake, and find it but a
dream? Perchance, Jurian, we but sleep deeper, and
the horrible phantom will again return.
Here is one will put it to flight forever, said
M`Crea, as Alice entered.
My mother!
Not your mother, Miriam, not your mother,
replied
Alice, receiving her in her arms.
Alice now stated that Miriam was her sister's child;
that the child she had by Corwin had died shortly after
she deserted her husband, and that her sister dying,
leaving Miriam an orphan, she had adopted her and
brought her up as her own. She further stated, that
the deranged condition of her mind had prevented her
from informing Jurian of the nature of his relationship
with the unhappy girl, nor had she, until a short time
previous, reverted to what might be their sufferings
while labouring under the belief that they were so
nearly
allied in blood. This thought came upon her as
VOL. II.17
soon as she had effected the escape of Jurian, and
nearly drove her frantic, as she now saw no means of
communicating the secret to him. She believed that
he would fly the country, and remain undeceived until
death, while a single word from her lips would have
spared him a life of misery. While occupied with these
reflections, M`Crea entered the cabin in which she was
confined, and she made known her feelings to him. He
left her to consult with captain Swain, who immediately
acquainted the commander-in-chief with all the
circumstances
of the casethe fact of her having placed the
life of her own son in jeopardyhis subsequent escape
the deception that had been practised upon the guard,
and the nature of the offence for which Jurian had been
arrested; the result was an immediate order for the
liberation of Alice, and a promise to suffer the young
man's conduct to pass without undergoing a public
investigation
,
as there was no evidence against him, except
that which was now locked up in the bosom of his
mother
,
and as the charge appeared to have been dictated
by the spirit of revenge. Their minds were relieved
by this information, although the weight of misery that
still remained, under different circumstances would
have been sufficient to crush them, yet we are happy
or wretched by comparison, and the magnitude of their
offence had so greatly diminished, that they felt
comparatively
happy. Jurian was permitted to go at large,
as Foster had no warrant for his detention, and was
unacquainted
with the transactions at Valley Forge.
The day of trial arrived. The principal witnesses that
appeared against Gordon, were Ephraim Horn and the
woman who had betrayed him; others came forward
to testify as to their having been robbed on the public
road, and identified the prisoner as the person who had
waylaid them. There were no witnesses on behalf of
Paul, except 'squire Morton and Nicholas the
innkeeper
,
both of whom bore testimony as to the general
good conduct of the party accused; but this had little
weight, as the evidence before the court left not a
shadow
of doubt as to the guilt of the prisoner. Gordon,
during the trial, behaved with calmness and
self-possession
.
He cross-examined Ephraim with
considerable
adroitness, and notwithstanding the solemnity of
the investigation, more than once elicited a laugh from
the jurors and the thoughtless by-standers. When
Madge came to the book to be sworn, his countenance
fell, and his demeanour became serious. He turned
his face from her, and said a few words to Nicholas,
who was standing hard by; wishing to conceal under
the veil of indifference, the emotion occasioned by the
presence of his betrayer. The testimony of Madge
was conclusive, but the treacherous part she had
performed
excited abhorrence in the minds of all who
listened
to her. Her testimony was no sooner received
than she withdrew among the crowd of spectators to
conceal herself from observation, and as she passed
the prisoners' box she covered her face, and did not
venture to encounter the gaze of the man her voice had
condemned to the gallows. Paul scarcely turned his
eyes towards her as she passed. He was found guilty
by the jury without leaving the box, and the awful
sentence
of the law was pronounced by the judges.
The trial of Miriam came on. The interest excited
by her appearance was intense. She was as pale as
death, and so feeble that her limbs could scarcely
support
her, when the clerk of the court called upon her
to stand forth and hold up her right hand, while he read
the indictment. At a few paces distant on the right of
the prisoners stood M`Crea and his son, awaiting in
dreadful suspense the event of the trial, while the
agitated
Alice was leaning on the railing immediately
behind
the prisoners. Silence was strictly observed
throughout the court-house, as every one appeared to be
too much engrossed with his own feelings to be
communicative
.
The witnesses examined were corporal Drone,
the countrymen who were present at the time of
discovering
the infant, Madge Haines, and Ephraim the
Quaker. The corporal stated the circumstances of the
case as they appeared, but as he could not relieve his
mind from prejudice in favour of the prisoner, he was
unwilling to permit a cause of such importance to rest
solely with the ingenuity of the counsel employed; he
accordingly gave his own colouring to the case, and
was prepared to enter largely into its merits, but was
interrupted in his harangue, and desired to confine
himself
solely to an unvarnished statement of the facts, which
somewhat disconcerted the corporal, and materially
abridged the thread of his story. He was mortified at
losing so fine an opportunity of displaying his eloquence,
and after repeating the facts three or four times over,
with several fruitless attempts to branch out, he was
dismissed, and he resumed his station among the crowd.
The countrymen corroborated the statement of
Drone, but Madge when called upon, was governed by
her jealously, and gave quite a different colouring to
the charge against the unfortunate Miriam. She
commenced
with the time she first knocked at the door,
previous to the arrival of Paul, and supplied her
narrative
with fictitious circumstances, alleged to have
transpired
during the night, which, if credited, went fully to
establish the guilt of the prisoner, and that the deed was
in agitation before the unhappy victim was ushered into
the world. Her testimony was heard with patience to
the close, when Paul rose, and in a deep voice,
exclaimed
It is a fabrication from the beginning to the end.
If you will hear me, I will state the facts fairly and
impartially
.
I am a doomed man; this world is nothing
to me now, you may therefore depend upon what I say,
for I have now no reason to deviate from the truth.
One of the attornies suggested, that as Paul was a
convict
,
his testimony was inadmissible, and he was
accordingly
rejected. I am then thrown beyond the
pale of society, exclaimed Paul, his large gray eyes
kindling; be it so; I have lost but little by it, if the
word of a sinner has sufficient weight with you to take
away the life of a saint. Beware, lest you condemn to
death a lovely being who has been guilty of but one
fatal error, upon the bare assertion of a wretch, covered
with crime, and so blotched, that all the fires below
will not purify her. Her offence towards me is sufficient
to blast her character, and impugn her testimony.
Doubtless I merited punishment, but not at her hands.
She should have been the first to protect; but was the
first to betray. What act have I been guilty of, that is
not spotless, compared to her treachery? And yet the
law protects and cherishes her, and sends me to the
gallows. He was interrupted by the judge, and ordered
to sit down; Paul obeyed reluctantly, and the testimony
of Ephraim Horn was taken, as to what transpired
during
the brief residence of Miriam at his house.
Having heard all the testimony, the lawyers
addressed
the jury, and were listened to with breathless
silence by the friends of the unfortunate girl. During
the speech of her advocate, a slight ray of hope stole
across their countenances; which gave place to the
gloom of despair, as the counsel for the prosecution
proceeded in his harangue. He was the abler man;
nature had lavished on him the persuasive power of
eloquence, by which the light of reason becomes
obscure
,
and the spotless robe of innocence is made to
appear as the garb of hypocrisyby which the most
virtuous action is converted into guilt, and a cherub's
smile into the grin of a demon. Hope fled from the
bosoms of Miriam and her friends, as the opposing
advocate
concluded. Alice, in her despair, cried out, Do
not listen to himthere is poison in his wordshe has
prostituted God's gifts to the service of Satanhe has
doomed to death the innocenthe has robbed the
widowed
mother of her child! She was silenced; the
jury retired, and shortly after returned a verdict that
the prisoner was guilty of concealing the death of her
17*
child. As the clerk pronounced the verdict, Miriam
fainted in the prisoners' box, and was supported by
Gordon
,
while Jurian bent over the railing to assist her,
and Paul placed her in his arms, accompanied with a
look which bespoke the deep contrition of his soul.
Alice stood horrorstruck, and M`Crea could not
conceal
from the by-standers how deeply he was
interested
in the scene. Miriam revived, sentence was
pronounced, and the court adjourned. As the judge
was speaking, the poor girl repeatedly exclaimed, I
am innocent; as God is my witness I am innocent;
but the acquittal by the conscience of the accused has
but little weight in this world, if the voices of his
fellow
mortals pronounce him guilty.
The prisoners were taken back to the jail. Gordon
walked firmly but dejectedly by the side of Foster.
Jurian and his wretched mother supported Miriam,
dissolved
in tears, to the prison door, where he left them,
and went in search of M`Crea, who had been led out
of the court-house, overpowered by his feelings, as soon
as the unhappy result of the trial was made known.
Alice entered the prison with Miriam, and Foster
obtained
permission for her to remain with her daughter
until the day of execution should arrive.
CHAPTER XIV.
You must rise and be hanged, master Barnardine.
Measure for Measure
.
The
day fixed for the execution of Gordon and
Miriam
having arrived, a large concourse of people
assembled
,
at an early hour, to witness the awful scene.
The gallows was erected upon a common, a short
distance
from Westchester village, and every tree in its
vicinity was bending with anxious spectators. Human
nature, however sublimated, possesses the power of
extracting a horrid sense of enjoyment from scenes too
appalling to contemplate in solitude. Few who join
the crowd to behold a public execution, could bear to
be the solitary witness of the violent death of a fellow
being, and yet, if the bustle and circumstance of the
world be around us, we become philosophical, and
calmly count the struggles it requires to force an
immortal
soul from its tenement of clay to the presence
of its Creator.
The street in front of the prison was crowded, and
as every one was anxious to get the first look, it was
with difficulty that the guard could keep the passage open
to the door. A short thickset man, whose bushy beard
gave him the appearance of a Jew in mourning, made
repeated attempts to get as near as practicable, but was
constantly repulsed by the guard, which he bore with
dogged perseverance, until he reached the station he
was ambitious of attaining. His arms were folded,
and he hung down his head as if wishing to avoid
observation
,
but kept his eyes riveted towards the door,
from which no remark of the crowd could divert them.
The impatience of the crowd increased as the hour
approached for the appearance of the condemned, and
there were those whose curiosity was excited to such a
degree, that they begrudged the few fleeting moments
of preparation allowed to those who were to suffer.
We revert with horror to the cruel pastime of the
Romans
,
who condemned the gladiator to death for the
amusement of the multitude. We recoil from the
bloody sacrifices that bigotry has required, under the
mask of religion, from the commencement of the
annals
of the world to the present hour, and we shudder
at the hellish delight experienced by the child of the
forest, while dancing like a fiend around the fire that
consumes his foe. The philanthropist recalls these
appalling scenes, and rejoices at the melioration of
mankind; but has that savage feeling yet been rooted
from the human heart, or does it only slumber from
the want of stimulus to awaken it? Behold the crowds
that constantly flock to every public execution, as to a
place of recreation, and notwithstanding the boasted
improvement that has taken place, we are irresistibly
led to the conclusion, that the important change is of
as little moment as the migrations of the honest vicar
of Wakefield, from the blue bed to the brown.
At length the prison door was unbarred, and Foster
appeared with Alice and M`Crea, who had just taken
a final leave of the unhappy Miriam. The outward
signs of grief had subsided, but the heart was inwardly
bleeding, as they took their station beside the person
above described, who no sooner recognised Alice than
he stepped back to make room for the mourner.
The doors were again thrown open and the prisoners
came forth, Paul walking with a firm and steady step.
His ruddy features were somewhat bleached by
thought and imprisonment, but the fire in his large
gray eyes was still undiminished. He was clad in
white, a cap was on his head, his hands were bound
behind him, and the halter was about his neck. Miriam
had been subjected to similar treatment, and she was
dressed in white also. Her step was faltering, her eyes
cast down, and red, and her countenance was as pale
as death, but calm and resigned. She was supported
by one of the officers of justice, who appeared more
affected by the melancholy duty he had to perform,
than the unfortunate being he assisted. When they
arrived in front of the spot where Alice stood, the
heart-broken woman sobbed aloud, and called upon
her child by name. The eyes of all were directed
towards
her, and Paul as he turned caught a glimpse of
the rugged figure standing beside her, and a gleam of
recognition crossed his pallid countenance, as he
beheld
his friend Nicholas, the quondam host of the
Crooked Billet. Nicholas raised his shaggy eyebrows,
as his eyes met those of Gordon, and they gazed on
each other for a moment in silence, but their looks
were pregnant with meaning.
Have I any friends here to see me die?
demanded
Paul, in a subdued tone.
More than one, responded Nicholas, but in such
a guarded manner, that even those who stood next to
him knew not from whom the answer proceeded.
Then I shall die, replied Paul, as the upright
man dieth, surrounded by his friends.
Even so must you die, was the answer returned,
but Nicholas looked not towards him as he spoke, and
Paul had turned his face in an opposite direction. He
then bent his head in token of farewell, his features
resumed
their former sternness, and he firmly moved
forward towards the cart prepared to receive him, and
in his passage he recognised several of his lawless
companions mingling in the crowd. Miriam followed
closely behind him, and as they advanced, Alice
rushed
forward, and laying hold of her garments,
exclaimed
O! God, you will not murder my child. Monsters,
she is innocent, and you lead the lamb to slaughter.
The guards thrust her back; she rushed forward a
second
time, and threw her arms around the feeble frame
of Miriam. Spare her life; O! spare her, or you
must answer to God for the shedding of innocent
blood. She is innocent, I say, as innocent as the
saints in heaven, of murder; then why drag her to
death!
The guard attempted to tear them asunder, rather
rudely, for Alice in her agony clasped the poor girl so
firmly, that considerable force was required to separate
them.
Do not injure my poor mother, said Miriam.
Respect her feelings, though you spare not mine.
We must do our duty, was the reply, and Alice
was driven back to the crowd.
If you are not merciless, she cried, let me
embrace
my child once again before you murder her.
Lead on; the time has already expired, said
Foster, and they advanced slowly.
If you would have the prayers of a broken-hearted
mother, continued Alice, grant me but one kiss, and
I will yield her to your bloody justice. They still
advanced
,
and she fell on her knees. I beseech you,
let me but touch her handher garmentand I will
yield her up without a murmur. Hear me, as you
would have God hear you in your extremest need. I
ask but to touch my childto have one look from her
before she diesand can you deny a broken-hearted
mother even this! Still they moved on.
Farewell, mother, sighed Miriam. Let us
hope to meet in a better world, for we meet no more
in this.
My child, my child!
Mercy was deaf to the petition of Alice, but as it fell
upon the cold ear of Gordon, it found the way to his
soul, and awakened recollections far more painful than
the remembrance of the offences for which he was
about to suffer, for his villany had occasioned the
misery
that he witnessed. He shuddered at every word
that passed the lips of Alice, as she continued her
petition
`for one kiss,' until they reached the cart, when
they were placed in it, and the procession slowly moved
on towards the gallows, while Alice and M`Crea
followed
with the rest of the crowd.
As the procession moved, Nicholas hurried on and
stationed himself as near the gallows as the guards
would permit, and near him stood the dwindled figure
of Ephraim Horn, with spectacles on nose, and
elongated
to his utmost altitude, in order to have a full view
of the coming scene. At a short distance from Ephraim
stood the corporal, and beside him the false Delilah
of the hapless Gordon. As Nicholas cast his lowering
eyes upon the company he was in, the corporal made
an attempt to renew their former intimacy, but mine
host eyed him sternly from head to foot, and turning
away, muttered something like the Devil's benediction.
The corporal retreated a few paces, and did not make
a second attempt to attract the notice of the once
jovial
host of the Crooked Billet. He spoke to Mistress
Haines, but she was engrossed with her own
reflections
,
and her eyes were riveted on the spectacle
before
her. He then turned to Ephraim, but as the spirit
had not yet moved the man of primitive manners to
pay the promised reward for the conviction of Gordon,
he also turned a deaf ear to the salutation of the
corporal
,
and would not suffer even a violent tug at his
skirts to attract his attention. He seemed as though
his mind were wholly engrossed in moralizing on the
awful scene, though he found it impossible to disengage
it from the idea of five pounds sterling money, the
amount of Drone's demand. This is not strange, as
we occasionally meet with men who can get their whole
souls within the narrow compass of a sixpence. The
corporal, however, was one of those who are not to be
put off with a slight rebuff, and as the first tug at the
Quaker's skirts was unnoticed, he tried a second, which
brought forth an ejaculation from the spirit of Ephraim.
Verily, it is an awful thing to meet Death and all
his terrors, when one is unprepared! But as this had
no bearing upon the corporal's five pounds, he
responded
And, verily, it is an awful thing to meet a creditor,
when one is unprepared! This was spoken in a tone
loud enough to excite the attention of all around, but
Ephraim, and as the corporal was a persevering man,
he tried a third and a fourth tug, until the stitches in
Ephraim's skirts began to crack, when it appeared that
he had not entirely lost the sense of hearing, for he
turned hastily upon the corporal, and exclaimed
Verily, friend, I believe thou art picking my
pocket, and unless thou dost desist, I shall be
compelled
to hand thee over to justice.
Bear witness, cried the corporal, he charges
me with picking his pocket, and he shall either prove
his words, or learn what it is to slander the character
of one who has served his country.
I did not charge thee, friend, with picking my
pocket, replied Ephraim; I mere expressed an
opinion
that thou wast doing it, and if I am in error, pray
what dost thou mean by tugging thus at my coat?
I would have five pounds hard money, fairly
earned
,
replied the corporal.
O! the power of Mammon! exclaimed Ephraim.
Canst thou thirst for the vanities of this world at such
a time as this?
To be sure I can, replied the other, and hunger
after them too.
Reflect upon the evanescent condition of thy
mortal
state.
I do, and therefore want my five pounds to sustain
it.
Remember, friend, that thou hast at this present
speaking a coat of mine upon thy back, which I
consider
a fair and legal setoff against thy demand of five
pounds.
Your coat be dd, cried the corporal, you
have already been paid two prices for it, with the usual
allowance for staytape and buckram. But a word in
your ear, old broadbrim. If I cannot get my five
pounds out of your pocket, burn me if I do not take it
out of your hide.
Verily, I cannot give ear unto thee now, for my
spirit is otherwise engaged. Ephraim endeavoured
to move out of his way, but Drone stuck close to his
skirts, vociferating for his five pounds, and boasting of
the magnanimous part he had played in the
apprehension
of Paul.
The cart containing the prisoners now drove under
the gallows, and an address to the Dispenser of all
good was made by an aged man who officiated on the
occasion. The prayer being closed, he sung a hymn,
in which he was joined by those immediately around
the gallows. The clear full voice of Nicholas was
heard above the rest, and his head was now elevated,
and his rugged features exposed. Madge also joined
the chant, but her head was bent down on her breast,
and her voice was tremulous and almost inaudible.
Among the crowd, the reckless companions of Gordon
were seen moving to and fro; he recognised them as
they passed, but from the armed force on the ground,
he was aware that any attempt at rescue would be
fruitless.
Alice Grey looked on in despair; the hood of her
cloak hanging on her shoulders, her head bare, and
her eyes riveted upon the faded form of Miriam, whose
pallid face was raised towards heaven. The hymn
being finished, the executioner demanded of Paul
VOL. II.18
whether he wished to address the multitude, but he
shook his head, signifying that he did not, and the
executioner
proceeded in his duty. He secured the rope
around the beam of the gallows, adjusted the knot, and
drew the white cap over the eyes of the criminal.
Why am I to be hoodwinked? demanded Paul.
Raise the cap from my eyes, that I may look upon
the world as long as I remain in it.
It is the custom, said the executioner.
To live blindly, but not to die blindly, replied
Paul. This holy man has been labouring to open
my eyes, and you would foolishly close them. Come,
let me die with my eyes open.
Miriam turned her face with horror from the
appalling
ceremony, and Gordon stood erect in the cart,
while all eyes were directed towards him in fearful
expectation
,
and a dead silence prevailed throughout the
concourse. The silence was broken by the sound of
a bugle, which was succeeded by a press in the crowd
towards the gallows. Paul recognised the familiar
notes of his own bugle, he saw the movement in the
crowd, and a momentary hope arose that his
companions
would yet attempt to save him. It was, however,
but a fleeting hope, for the next instant he heard the
voices of the guards commanding the crowd to stand
back, and the heavy tread of the mass receding. Order
was again restored.
Miriam's terrors had nearly deprived her of every
faculty
,
physical and mental. Her eyes were vacant and
tearless, her cheeks ashy pale, and her lips as
colourless
as her cheeks. She trembled in every joint; every
muscle was relaxed, and her languid head fell upon
the bosom of the executioner. As he gazed upon her,
a tear dropped from his glazed eyeballs upon the
death-like
cheek of the law's victim. It was but a momentary
gush of feeling, and his pulse again beat as temperately
as ever, as he proposed the usual question, whether
she forgave him.
You have never wronged me, she faintly replied,
then what have I to forgive?
He would be forgiven the wrong he is about to do,
replied Gordon; and as it will be too late to ask the
question after it is done, he prudently takes time by
the forelock.
Let him rest satisfied, I shall carry no animosity
to the grave.
He now systematically adjusted the knot, cast the
cord over the gallows, and ascended the ladder to
fasten it, while Foster supported her. Alice stood
gazing
at the fearful preparation, stupified with horror.
All her faculties seemed to have abandoned her. She
watched every act that was done with painful intensity,
but neither attempted to speak nor move. Her lips
quivered, she gasped for breath, and big drops of
perspiration
stood upon her forehead as the executioner
secured the rope around the beam. The feelings of
the frantic mother were wrought to a crisis; human
nature could bear no more; she rushed forward a few
steps, uttered a frantic shriek, and fell to the ground.
Miriam recognised her as she fell, and exclaimed, in
an agony of grief
Mother, mother! why are you here!
My child! O! spare my child!
Away, and let me die. Farewell! and may heaven
support you in this affliction. Mother, beloved,
farewell
!
Her voice was inarticulate, and scarcely audible,
and as she concluded, her head sunk upon Foster's
bosom.
Corporal Drone, and some of the by-standers,
advanced
to administer relief to Alice, while one of the
officers demanded of the executioner, who had paused
in the administration of his duty, whether all was ready,
to which Foster replied that she had fainted, and was
still unconscious of what was passing.
We are nearly an hour over the time appointed for
her death, continued the other.
It would be unchristianlike to take her life while
in this state, observed Foster.
Then wait until she revives.
That will be at the day of judgment, added
Gordon
,
eyeing the motionless and relaxed form of the
hapless girl, as she was supported in the arms of the
jailor.
Some confusion and uproar now took place in the
crowd, and immediately after a man appeared on
horseback
,
bareheaded, his hair flying loosely, and his shirt
open. He dashed through the crowd like a madman,
heedless of whom he trampled on; his horse was in a
foam, and he rode to the foot of the gallows, in spite
of the resistance of the guards, who attempted to thrust
him back. He checked his horse, and casting a look
of distraction towards the gallows, exclaimed
She is reprieved, she is reprieved! but, merciful
heaven! I am too late! Saying which, he fell
exhausted
from his seat to the earth.
What is the meaning of this interruption?
demanded
one of the officers.
It is Jurian Hartfield, replied Foster, who went
to Lancaster to solicit a reprieve from the executive
council.
And has he been successful?
It would appear so.
Where is she? exclaimed Jurian, as they raised
him from the ground. She is reprieved, I tell you,
and you commit murder in the eye of man, if you touch
her life. But, O! I am too late! Ten minutes sooner,
and I should have saved her! But, O God, I am too
late!
Be composed; you are not too late, replied
Foster
,
and Jurian gazed at him vacantly. Be satisfied;
you are not too late.
Heaven is merciful! But where is she!
Here, unharmed.
That form so like to death, with all the fearful
preparation
for death already done!Can it be possible
that thou art saved at such a time, my Miriam!
He hurried to the cart, and threw his arms
passionately
around the insensible form of the poor girl, and
Foster, released from his burden, removed the cord
from her neck.
Look up, my Miriam; open thy eyes again, fear
not, for thy friends are with you. Look up, look up;
thou art saved, MiriamI have succeeded. Dost thou
not hear me?Thou art saved.
The dead do not hear, said Gordon.
The dead!It cannot be! Awake, thou injured
one. Speak to me. Move but thy handgive any
sign that life is not yet extinct.
The dead can make no sign, continued the other.
Fiend in the shape of man, what meanest thou?
I said, I should not die alone, replied Gordon,
and you see my words are verified.
Dead!she is not dead. O no, I feel her warm
breath upon my cheek, and her heart still beats, though
faintly. Wretch, that savage triumph will be denied
you. Look, Foster, she revives; her eyes art partly
openand here, feel her hand; it still glows with the
warmth of life, and does not feel as the touch of one
that's dead.
Foster took her hand and pressed it in his own for a
moment, and as he relinquished it, it fell languidly by
her side, and he was silent.
Why do you not speak? continued Jurian. Is
not the warmth of life there? She has only swooned
from terror. That was not the touch of death. Speak,
Foster, speak.
There is no hope, said Foster. She is dead.
Dead! It cannot be that she is dead! he
exclaimed
,
in a tone of bitter anguish.
She is dead! shrieked Alice, catching the words
18*
of her son, and who had witnessed the foregoing, in
an agony of mind little short of madness.
Yes, she is dead, repeated Gordon, and I do
not die alone.
Is this a time to triumph?
Remember, sir, he continued, addressing Jurian,
there was a way to have saved her, but you refused,
and took your own course. Behold her now.
Jurian frantically called upon the name of Miriam,
and being satisfied that the vital spark was extinct, he
burst into an agony of tears. The body was taken from
his arms by Foster, and removed to the spot where
Alice and M`Crea were standing, and a vehicle being
procured, Jurian and his parents left the scene of death,
bearing the remains of Miriam with them.
Gordon now stood alone in the cart. A breathless
silence prevailed throughout the crowd, and the hymn
again ascended.
Gordon, you forgive me? said the executioner.
I do.
He then waved his handthe cart moved, and as
the criminal felt it receding, he sprang into eternity, and
a shriek of horror arose from the crowd.
Nicholas watched the body until it ceased to
struggle
.
A few moments and all was overwhen the shrill
notes of a bugle were heard, and he hastily
disappeared
,
and others, who had been hovering closely around
the gallows, followed him. Madge also withdrew as
soon as she beheld the consummation of her treachery,
and the concourse slowly dispersed, each to his
worldly
avocation, and the revolting exhibition, which the
law allows under the name of a salutary warning, was
only remembered as a holyday recreation. They had
witnessed the violent death of a human being, and
found it no such awful matter as imagination had
pictured
.
CHAPTER XVI.
Non est cantandum, res vera agitur.
Juv. Sat. IV
.
While
the American forces encountered an
unbroken
series of privation in their quarters at Valley
Forge, the British were enjoying every luxury within
the walls of a well built city. Their amusements were
better suited to times of peace than war, and frequently
the sun arose, and beheld the orgies yet unfinished,
that had commenced at his setting the preceding day.
Major M`Druid was almost a daily guest at 'squire
Morton's table, and belonging to that class who make
love from habit to every female that accident may
throw in their way, he said innumerable fine things to
Miss Rebecca, but without committing himself, or
arriving
at any definite conclusion. The spinster manuvred
to draw forth a formal declaration of his passion, but
the major was too old a bird to be taken with chaff,
and when she imagined that she had dexterously driven
him into a corner, he would dart off at a tangent, and
be perfectly free, before she could discover by what
means he had evaded the net. The major possessed
great volubility of tongue, and as his ideas flowed
rapidly
,
he would traverse the four quarters of the globe,
and pay a visit to the centre; commence with Adam
and Eve, take you through the flood, and be present at
the building of Babel, then dart off among the Greeks,
Trojans, and Scythianslead you through the fall of
empires in safety, and shed the light of noonday upon
the darker ages, and all this while drinking a glass of
wine, and without leaving a solitary idea upon the mind
of the hearer. Volubility of tongue is a great blessing,
when a man wishes to evade an unpleasant question.
While affairs stood thus between the major and Miss
Buckley, Balcarras prosecuted his suit to Miss Morton
with zeal, though she constantly urged him to banish
it, as it was hopeless, but instead of following her
advice
,
he became more earnest to convince her of the
impossibility of living without her. How circumscribed
is the lover's world, and how thinly peopled! `Music
is the food of love,' says Shakspeare, and the colonel
cried, `play on.' Accordingly, the neighbourhood in
which Agatha resided was not permitted to be at peace
of nights for the drone of bagpipes, and other more
melodious instruments. Plague take the fellow, the
'squire would exclaim, he is become a downright
nuisance
with his serenades; and because he cannot sleep
himself, he imagines he is at liberty to keep the whole
town awake. Music certainly has a more heavenly
influence at the dead of night than at any other hour,
but the 'squire did not relish being startled from his
first sleep, after a debauch, to listen to it, for not one
time in ten would the singing in his head accord with
the pitch-note of the bagpipe. Balcarras, however,
paid little regard to the comforts of the 'squire, and
most heroically devoted the whole winter in
endeavouring
to fiddle himself into the affections of Agatha.
Sir William Howe, being dissatisfied at not receiving
such reinforcements as he deemed necessary for the
speedy termination of the war, and the ministers, on
their part, complaining of a want of energy in his
military
career, tendered his resignation, which was
accepted
,
and sir Henry Clinton, who was appointed in
his place, arrived at Philadelphia on the 8th of May,
1778. To grace the departure of their late commander,
the officers of the army prepared a brilliant
entertainment
,
which they called the Mischianza, and which
was perhaps the most splendid triumph ever bestowed
upon a hero for victories never won.
The fete began at four in the afternoon of the 18th
of May, by a grand regatta on the Delaware, consisting
of three divisions, a galley and ten flat boats in each,
dressed out in a variety of colours and streamers. In
the front of the whole were three flat boats with bands
of music, and six barges rowed about each flank to
keep off the swarm of boats that covered the river from
side to side. In the stream, opposite the centre of the
city, the Fanny armed ship, magnificently decorated,
was placed at anchor, and at some distance lay the
Roebuck, with the admiral's flag hoisted at the
foretopmast
head. The transport ships, extending in a line
the whole length of the town, appeared with colours
flying, and crowded with spectators, as were also the
wharves and houses on the shore. The signal being
given, the three divisions rowed slowly down,
preserving
their proper intervals, and keeping time to the music
that led the fleet.
Agatha was of the party on board the Cornwallis
galley that brought up the rear, and a slight flush on
her pallid cheek indicated the exhilarating influence of
the scene. Many bright eyes grew brighter in the
group of beauty by which she was surrounded, and
`grim visag'd war had smooth'd his fearful front,' for
even the rugged features of old Knypthausen, who
was on board, were twisted into something that
approached
the caricature of a smile. He felt that it was
the most poetic passage of his life, for even the dullest
life has its poetic passages, and though some are so
happily constituted, that a bright day, or a solitary sail
by moonlight, on the bosom of some sequestered lake,
will call forth thoughts that are not of this world, yet
there are others of so sluggish a temperament, that it
requires the bursting of a volcano, or the din of battle,
to convince them that they are not composed entirely
of earth. Still there was one on board that galley, who
witnessed the bright display with a cold eye and an
unchanged countenance. He looked inward for his
thoughts, and not upon external objects, if we except
the delicate form of Agatha. It was Jurian.
The procession having passed the Fanny, a signal
was made from one of the boats ahead, and the whole
lay upon their oars while the music played God save
the King, and three cheers given from the vessels,
were returned by the multitude on shore.
By this time the flood tide became too rapid for the
gallies to advance, they were therefore abandoned, and
the company disposed of in the several barges. While
this change was being made, the officer who presided
at the council board, on the night that Jurian was
deluded
by Gordon, stood for a moment in front of him,
and their eyes met.
Is it possible, exclaimed the officer, that I find
you among us at last?
Among you, but not of you.
Then why are you here? Mere curiosity could
not have induced you to take so rash a step?
I came in search of you, sir.
Make known your wishes.
Not now; it is neither time nor place. When this
parade is over, shall we meet?
Certainly, if you desire it. But pardon me, if I
doubt my being the sole object of your visit here,
replied
the officer, at the same time casting a look
towards
Agatha, who had taken her seat in the barge.
Well, then, perhaps I had an additional motive,
replied Jurian, for I would see her too.
Then why delay speaking to her, since she is at
hand?
I would not have the eyes of the world witness
our meeting, nor yet our parting. Nor would I, from
mere selfishness, disturb the pleasure that this gay
scene may afford her.
You are right; I have heard your story since our
last interview, and think it prudent not to interrupt her
present enjoyment. Will you descend to the barge?
There is still room.
I will follow in the next, lest she discover me.
Do so. You will see me again, when we reach
the place of landing.
The respective barges having received their freight,
the procession proceeded to the landing place at the
old Fort, a little south of the city line. As soon as the
barge that contained general Howe was seen to push
for the shore, a salute of seventeen guns was fired from
the Roebuck, and after some interval, the same
number
from the Vigilant.
The company, as they disembarked, arranged
themselves
into a line of procession, and advanced through
an avenue formed by two files of grenadiers, and a line
of light hourse supporting each file. This avenue led
to a square lawn, railed in and prepared for a
tournament
,
according to the customs and ordinances of
ancient
chivalry. Each side of the lawn was lined with
military. The procession moved through the centre of
the square, preceded by music, consisting of all the
bands of the army.
In front of the avenue appeared sir Harry Colder's
house, bounding the view, through a vista formed by
two triumphal arches, erected at proper intervals in a
line with the place of landing. Two pavilions, in the
form of amphitheatres, in which were rows of benches
rising one above another, and serving as the advanced
wings of the first arch, received the ladies, while the
gentlemen ranged themselves on each side. On the
front seat of each pavilion were placed seven young
ladies, dressed in Asiatic habits, and wearing in their
turbans the favours with which they meant to reward
the several knights who were to contend in their
honour
.
These arrangements were scarce made when
the sound of trumpets was heard at a distance, and a
band of knights, dressed in ancient habits of white and
red silk, and mounted on grey horses, richly
caparisoned
in trappings of the same colours, entered the lists
attended by their esquires, on foot. They were
accompanied
by four trumpeters, properly habited, and their
trumpets decorated with small pendant bannersa
herald
in his robes of ceremony, and on his tunic was the
device of his band, two roses entwined with the motto,
`we droop when separated.' A low murmur
throughout
the crowd signified their admiration. Lord
Cathcart
,
superbly mounted, appeared as the chief of these
knights, and two young slaves with sashes and drawers
of blue and white silk, wearing large silver clasps
around their necks and arms, their breasts and
shoulders
bare, held his stirrups. Two esquires, one
bearing
his lance, and the other his shield, walked on either
side of his horse. Then came in order the knights of
this band, each attended by his esquire, bearing his
lance and shield. They made the circuit of the square,
and saluted the ladies as they passed before the
pavilion
,
and then ranged themselves in a line with that in
which were the ladies of their device.
A brilliant spectacle, indeed! exclaimed the officer,
to whom we have several times referred, and who now
stood beside Jurian, near the pavilion in which Agatha
was seated. Would not your heart swell with pride
to be in the lists, and have so many bright eyes
looking
on in admiration?
If they were the lists of death, I should indeed
wish to be there, replied Jurian, but I am not
ambitious
to add another unmeaning scene to the farce of
life.
Thou art a strange being, if such a display cannot
awaken a sense of pleasure.
I came not here for pleasure.
They were interrupted by the herald advancing into
the centre of the square, and after a flourish of
trumpets
,
proclaiming the following challenge:
The Knights of the Blended Rose, by me, their
herald
,
proclaim and assert that the ladies of the Blended
Rose, excel in wit, beauty, and every accomplishment,
those of the whole world; and should any knight or
knights be so hardy as to dispute or deny it, they are
ready to enter the lists, and maintain their assertions by
deeds of arms, according to the laws of ancient
chivalry
.
There is surely no one present rash enough to
accept
the challenge, said Balcarras to Miss Morton,
since you are of the Blended Rose.
Rather of the White Rose, my lord, she replied,
or my mirror is treacherous.
Impossible! For even a Dutch looking-glass that
would operate as a paralytic stroke upon the face of
Venus fresh from the sea, could not fail to reflect
perfect
beauty, if you were to smile upon it.
But if I did not smile, how then?
Then from the bottom of my heart do I pity the
poor mirror, for I know how painful a task it is to
endure
your frowns.
At the third repetition of the challenge, the sound of
trumpets was heard from the opposite side of the
square; and another herald, with four trumpeters
dressed
in black and orange, galloped into the lists; he was
met by the herald of the Blended Rose, and after a short
parley, they both advanced in front of the pavilions,
when the black herald ordered his trumpets to sound,
and thus proclaimed defiance to the challenge:
The Knights of the Burning Mountains present
themselves here, not to contest by words, but to
disprove
by deeds, the vainglorious assertions of the
Knights of the Blended Rose; and enter the lists to
maintain that the ladies of the Burning Mountains are
not excelled in beauty, virtue, or accomplishments, by
any in the universe.
VOL. II.19
He then returned to the post of the barrier through
which he had entered, and shortly after the Black
Knights, attended by their 'squires, rode into the lists,
preceded by four trumpeters and the herald, on whose
tunic was represented a mountain sending forth flames.
After they had rode round the lists and made their
obeisance to the ladies, they drew up fronting the
White Knights, and the chief of these having thrown
down his gauntlet, the chief of the Black Knights, who
was dressed in a magnificent suit of black and orange
silk, and mounted on a black managed horse, with
trappings
of the same colours as his own dress, directed
his 'squire to take up the gauntlet.
The knights then received their lances from their
'squires, fixed their shields on their left arms, and
making
a general salute to each other, by a graceful
movement
of their lances, turned round to take their career,
and encountering in full gallop, shivered their spears.
In the second and third encounter they discharged their
pistols, in the fourth they fought with their swords, and
finally the two chiefs, spurring forward into the centre,
engaged furiously in single combat, till the marshal of
the field rushed in between them, and thus proclaimed
aloud:
The fair damsels of the Blended Rose and Burning
Mountains, are perfectly satisfied with the proofs of
love and the signal feats of valour given by their
respective
knights, and command them, as they prize
the future favours of their mistresses, that they
instantly
desist from further combat.
The chiefs, like true knights, paid immediate
obedience
to this order, and rejoined their respective bands.
The White Knights and their attendants filed off to
the left, the Black Knights to the right, and after
passing
each other, at the lower side of the quadrangle,
moved up alternately, until they approached the
pavilions
of the ladies, when they gave a general salute.
'Squire Morton, who was by no means among the
least interested of the spectators, as the tournament
ceased, exclaimed to his sister-in-law, in whose bosom
the ashes of romance began to glow
What do you think of all that, Becky? Is there
any thing in the whole course of your reading to be
compared with it? Come, rummage your lumber-room,
and let us have your ideas on the subject.
Really, brother, I remember but one scene of the
kind, that with reason may be brought in comparison
with it.
And what is that, Becky; what is that?
The celebrated attack, sir, of the chivalrous Don
Quixote upon the wind-mill, replied the spinster,
gravely.
You were a born idiot, Becky, and what is very
remarkable, with all your learning you have not made
the discovery yet.
For shame, brother!
A passage being made between the two pavilions,
the knights, preceded by their 'squires and bands of
music, rode through the first triumphal arch, and
arranged
themselves to the right and left. This arch,
which was erected in honour of lord Howe, presented
two fronts in the Tuscan order, the pediment was
adorned with various naval trophies, and at the top was
the figure of Neptune, with a trident in his right hand;
in a nich on each side stood a sailor, with a drawn
cutlass
,
and three plumes of feathers were placed on the
summit of each wing.
A wide extended avenue, lined on each side with a
file of troops, and the colours of the different regiments
planted at proper distances, led to the second triumphal
arch. Between the colours the knights and their
attendants
took their stations. The bands continued to
play, and the company moved forward in procession,
with the ladies in the Turkish habits in front; as these
passed they were saluted by their knights, who then
dismounted and joined them, and in this order they
entered a beautiful garden that fronted the mansion,
through the second triumphal arch, of the Tuscan
order
,
and dedicated to the general. On the top of this
arch stood the figure of Fame; on the right hand pillar
was placed a bomb-shell, and on the left a flaming
heart.
From the garden they ascended a flight of steps,
covered
with carpets, which led into a spacious saloon,
decorated in a style of splendour more befitting Asiatic
luxury than the simplicity of the new world. Here
the company partook of a variety of refreshments,
during which time the knights came in, and on their
bended knees received their favours from their
respective
dames, and thus were rewarded for that
prowess
in the mimic joust that fortune had denied them on
the field of battle.
While these fantastic ceremonies were going forward,
the officer already alluded to, approached Jurian, and
said
I have now a few moments leisure, sir, and feel
impatient to hear your commands. Let us retire to
another apartment, where we may be less liable to
interruption
.
They withdrew, and as soon as they were alone, and
the door closed, Jurian addressed him
I have come, sir, to redeem a pledge that I once
placed in your hands, and though it has become
somewhat
tarnished since I parted with it, and is now of
little value to its owner, still I will redeem it.
What pledge? You speak in riddles.
I mean my honour. When it was of value, I
bartered
it away for dross, and now that it is worthless, I
return the price received, and cancel the obligation
between
us. Here, sir, is your due. Saying which, he
handed a purse to the officer, who looked at him in
amazement. I promised, when we last parted, that
the money should be returned, and I have kept my
word.
Thou singular being, exclaimed the officer, and
was it for this that you have come among us?
It was, but not for this alone. Here, take the
purse.
Nay, keep it; it is of little moment to me, and I
cannot think of receiving it again, knowing the deceit
that was practised on you.
True, it may be of little moment to you, but it is
of less to me, and as you were instrumental in my
degradation
,
I demand it as an act of justice that you
receive it again.
I readily enter into your feelings, and respect them
too highly, to wound them longer by opposing your
wishes.
Thank God, exclaimed Jurian, as he handed him
the purse, that black account is closed. It has been
as the spot of leprosy on my soul, and though there is
no cure, still there is some relief, in feeling that I am
no longer a bartered slave.
Why suffer your morbid feelings to picture your
condition in such gloomy colours?
Is there a mantle too inky for me to wear! But
no matter. I am about to ask a favour, and as you
conferred one that destroyed me, you will not deny
another, which, under different circumstances, would
prove a curse also. I wish to leave the country, and
as sir William Howe will sail in a day or two, I would
obtain a passage on board his ship, if possible.
You would leave the country? Then you have
changed your opinion, and now consider the present
struggle hopeless?
My opinion is still the same; the war cannot end
until the country is free; and when the spirit of order
shall move through the chaos that now prevails, and
reduce it to a shape, posterity will look back to our
present struggles with the enthusiasm of the Greeks to
the Persian war; will date the era of their greatness
from the American revolution, and mark out the
Marathon
19*
and Plata in this hemisphere, where their liberty
was purchased with the price of blood.
The ardour of your enthusiasm, I perceive, has
not abated. But if such be the destiny of the colonies,
why do you abandon them at a time when, as you
imagine
,
they are about to take their place among the
nations
of the earth?
Because I should here feel as a slave among the
free. I would go where my name and my shame are
unknown.
Reflect, before you adopt a course so rash. There
are still ties to bind you to your native land, that may
not be idly broken.
There is one, and one only. Still that must be
broken.
What, though
her
heart be broken in the effort? I
have already said that I am acquainted with your story,
and
her's
even a less observant eye than mine may
plainly read. The winter has been one uninterrupted
scene of gaicty, and she mingled in it, yet partook not
of it. Her ears have been hourly greeted with adulation
from the lips of the most courtly, and she heeded it
not. Fortune and distinction have combined to wean
her thoughts from you, and she has turned from them
to endeavour to discover a star of hope in the gloomy
future. Then how can you talk of abandoning a being
so devoted?
That I may not imitate the tyrant of old, replied
Jurian, and chain the living body to the dead. Think
you that would be a proof of the holy love I bear her,
and a just return for her matchless constancy? No;
rather let me go where my name may never again
reach her ears, and she may cease to think of me as
among the living until other thoughts shall have effaced
the remembrance of her present sorrows.
Why this is absolute despair. I thought you
possessed
of a mind that would rise superior to any human
affliction. For shame! Even the card by which you
gained admission here should have taught you hope.
Look at it again.
A gay card, said Jurian, taking the ticket. Here
is a view of the sea, with the setting sun, and in the
wreath a motto:`Luces decedens aucto splendore
resurgam.' True, the mighty and mysterious movements
of the planetary systems are calculated to elevate the
mind from the grovelling thoughts of this world, but my
sun is set, never to rise again.
This is womanish.
The stoutest bow may be bent until its elasticity
is destroyed. You have not yet said whether you will
comply with my wishes?
If to-morrow you continue in the same mind, I will
endeavour to procure you a passage. But, hark! the
company move towards the ball-room. Shall we join
them?
Jurian bowed assent, and they entered a spacious
apartment decorated for the ball, which was begun by
the knights and their ladies, and such was the exciting
influence of the scene, that even 'squire Morton, in
spite of the gout, attempted to lead his antiquated
sister-in-law through the mazes of the dance. Agatha
moved like a sylph, and though all eyes followed her
in admiration, yet the sad expression of her
countenance
denoted that her mind partook not of the
enlivening
spirit that prevailed. Jurian stood in the crowd,
and the only object that his eye rested upon in that vast
assemblage, was the light and delicate form of Agatha.
He heard not the enlivening notes that set the puppets
in motion. The taste and skill that had decorated the
scene was lost on him, and the gay knights, whose
presence carried back the imagination to the days of
romance and chivalry, moved before him unseen. His
mind was chained to one thought, that operated as the
spell of his evil genius that defied the influence of all
others to weaken. Agatha's eye caught his figure as
she moved through the dance, and he hastily changed
his position.
The windows were now suddenly thrown open, and
a display of fireworks was exhibited, equally various
and beautiful, towards the conclusion of which, the
interior
part of the triumphal arch, dedicated to general
Howe, was illuminated amidst an uninterrupted flight
of rockets and bursting of baloons. The military
trophies
on each side assumed a variety of transparent
colours; the shell and flaming heart on the wings sent
forth Chinese fountains, and Fame appeared at top,
spangled with stars, and from her trumpet blowing in
letters of light`Thy laurels shall never fade.' It is
remarkable that, notwithstanding this flattering promise,
that trumpet has been mute on the subject ever since.
A sauteur of rockets bursting from the pediment,
concluded
the feu d'artifice.
The magical illusion that had prevailed throughout
the entertainment, was kept up to the last. As the
clock struck
twelve, large folding doors, hitherto
artfully
concealed, were suddenly thrown open, and
discovered
a magnificent and extended saloon, from which
came an overpowering stream of light, from countless
tapers, lustres, and mirrors. Tables were spread
profusely
with the various luxuries of the old and new
world, and that nothing might be wanting to assist in
deluding the imagination into the belief that it was but
a dream of oriental splendour, upwards of forty black
slaves in eastern costumes, with collars and bracelets,
were ranged in two lines, and they bent their bodies to
the ground as the company descended from the
hallroom
to the saloon. This assemblage of gay objects
combined, and bursting thus unexpectedly into view,
formed a scene magnificent beyond description, and thus
they put a brilliant close to the unsuccessful campaign
of sir William Howe. This was a piece of dramatic
art that they acquired while enacting at the South street
Theatreit is a good rule, and should be strictly
observed
,
to enable the principal actor to make his final
exit amidst three rounds of applause.
As the company descended, Balcarras approached
Agatha, with the view of escorting her to the saloon.
I can undergo no more, she faintly said. Will
this fantastic display never have an end! My spirits
are overpowered; my brain reels, and the atmosphere
is so close that I can scarcely breathe.
Allow me to conduct you to the fresh air; the
night breeze will revive you.
Call my brother.
He is at the further extremity of the saloon, and
the crowd is so great that some time may elapse before
I can reach him. Why not allow me to wait upon
you?
I would not take you from this scene of pleasure.
It ceases to be such to me when you are absent.
This is folly, my lord, or worse, as you know my
thoughts. Pray, call my brother, and I will here await
his coming.
Balcarras withdrew to attend to her commands, and
as the crowd dispersed, Jurian was seen standing at a
short distance from Agatha, with his eyes fixed intently
upon her. She turned and beheld him.
That figure there again! she exclaimed. It has
haunted me throughout the day, and has so bewildered
me, that I doubt whether I am in my senses, or dream.
What can it mean!
I have sought this moment for hours, said Jurian,
approaching, and there is no time to lose. Agatha,
we meet again.
That voice! Jurian! can it be!
Well may you doubt the evidence of your own
senses, when you behold a wretch so changed.
Changed, indeed, since even I questioned your
identity. More than once have my eyes caught a
glimpse of you in the crowd, but not dreaming of
meeting
you here, or seeing you thus, I knew not what to
make of the strong resemblance, and I began to fear
that the excitement of the day had bewildered my
brain.
Heaven grant that no greater excitement ever
bewilder
you! I would speak to you alone, Agatha, but
one word; yet, I would have no other hear that word.
Lead me to the open air, where I may breathe
more freely, and you speak without fear.
Ay, in the open air, where the countless eyes of
heaven may look down upon usthat is wellbut no
other eye.
What means this! Are you mad!
Not now, Agatha, not now. True, my life has
been little better than a madman's dream, but whips
and scourges have at length awakened me to reason.
Come to the open air, where we may breathe more
freely, with the bright face of heaven before us.
She leaned on his arm and they left the hall, then
crossed the garden, and proceeded in silence until they
reached the triumphal arch nearest the mansion, which
was now deserted.
Here let us pause, said Agatha. How brightly
the stars shine, and how refreshing the breeze as it
comes from the water.
We have before us the placid splendour of heaven,
the inviting beauties of earth in spring, and the
ostentatious
display that man puts forth to magnify his
insignificance
.
Nature and art have combined to awaken
the most grateful feelings, and yet in the midst of all
this fascination, the darkest moment of my life has
come.
Wherefore the darkest?
Because I am now about to tear out the last
human
tie from my bosomthe last and deepest rooted.
There is no tie so sacred but that it may be broken.
If it survive the changes that all hearts are prone to,
still death will come in at last and sever it. Parents
pass to their graves, are mourned for a season, and no
matter how tenderly beloved, in time their loss is
remembered
without pain. Kindred who were nourished
at the same breast, slept in each others' arms from
infancy
,
and whose joys and griefs were the same, are
frequently doomed to separate as widely as this globe
can part them. The conjugal tie, the purest and
strongest that the heart can conceive, often becomes
as a spider's web, when death has removed the object
beloved. The grave soon drinks up the tears of the
mourner, and grief gives place to thoughts and feelings
better suited to the living.
Whither does this tend?
When I am gone, Agatha, I would have you think
of me as of one that's dead.
When thou art gone!
I have said that our grief for the departed soon
subsides, and if you needs must grieve when we are
separated, let the next smile you meet dry the tear.
But our grief for the living knows no cure.
They may be unworthy of your sorrow. I came
to breathe but one word, and my heart clings to it, and
my tongue refuses to utter it. Still it must be spoken,
though it tear asunder all connexion with this world.
Agathathou earliest and last beloved!farewell!
Jurian!
And forever!
Thou wilt not leave me! Thou canst not! There
is now no bar between us.
One that we may not pass. I would not doom you
to a life of blighted hope with a wretch proscribed.
No, Agatha, a bright world is before you, enjoy its
sunshine, and leave the shade to me.
Young Morton was heard calling the name of Agatha.
Your brother's voice. I must be brief. Throw
me from your thoughts, Agatha, as a thing unworthy
to be remembered. Look upon what has past as a
dream that could never be realized, and thank heaven
that it was nothing but a dream.
Agatha! Agatha! again shouted young Morton.
They come. Let no mortal eye witness this
parting
.
One kiss, as cold and holy as that which an
anchorite
bestows upon the skull that reminds him of his
doom. 'Tis done. Again, farewell!
The voice of young Morton was again heard, and
Jurian shouted, Agatha is here.
Do not leave me yet, she feebly said, as she
threw herself on his neck.
We meet no more in this world.
He pressed her yielding form in an agony to his
bosom
,
and then placed it on the pedestal of the arch.
He imprinted another kiss on her pale forehead, and
cried
Ho! there, Agatha is here. He theu hurried
from the spot, and immediately after young Morton
and Balcarras approached, and discovered where she
lay.
CHAPTER XVII.
Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history.
As You Like It
.
The
morning after the splendid entertainment of
which we have attempted a description, the gallant
ship that was to bear sir William Howe across the
Atlantic, hauled out into the stream, ready for the
voyage. She was as trim as a fair belle upon her first
entrance into the fashionable world, and to pursue the
simile, your fashionable dame, when her race is run,
may be compared to the tempest-tost vessel, after a
tedious voyage. Boats were plying between the shore
and the ship, and on the deck and aloft all hands were
busily employed. Sir William Howe was already on
board, and Jurian stood upon the deck, taking a last
melancholy look at his native land.
Near him stood the officer to whose friendly
interference
he was indebted for his passage, tracing in
silence
the effect of his feelings upon his pale visage.
At length he said
The time is fast approaching, when the land to
which you are so fondly attached will fail from your
sight, and perhaps forever.
Would it were already come, he replied, but still
kept his eyes fixed upon the scene of his childhood.
Do you not begin to repent of your rash
determination
?
VOL. II.20
Your looks betray the feelings of a child while
watching by the death-bed of a parent.
Still the child survives those feelings. The
strongest
grief is not immortal.
Since you are resolved, continued the officer,
here is a man who came on board with me, this
morning
,
for the purpose of taking a parting leave.
Jurian turned, and beheld M`Crea.
Why is that man here?
He came under the protection of a flag, replied
the officer, to recover a lost son.
He should have thought of that sooner.
You will not desert him in his old age?
He deserted me in my youth. All human ties
originate
either in interest or gratitude, and my heart
recognises
towards him neither the one nor the other.
Though I am rejected, said M`Crea, remember,
Jurian, there are those who have been to you more
than parentsand have you the cruelty to embitter
the remnant of their lives, after all their kindness?
While I breathe I shall remember them with
gratitude
,
and shall not cease to pray for their happiness
even when I forget to pray for my own. Tell them
this, and conjure them, if they can, to forget me. My
mind is fixed. Farewell.
You shall not go alone, my son, cried M`Crea.
I will accompany you.
And by your presence keep the wound still
bleeding
!
No; stay where you are, for there is much that
I would forget, that your presence would only serve to
keep fresh in my memory.
He did not turn his eyes towards his father as he
spoke, but continued looking intently in the direction
of the city.
Why is it that you do not even look at me, said
the humbled M`Crea, but appear to feel deeper regret
in parting from those walls than from a father?
They awaken the remembrance of many joyful
hours passed within them, but when I turn to you, sir,
no page is presented that the heart of a son would wish
to persue again. Leave me, and do not again interrupt
the melancholy enjoyment of the few moments that
remain.
M`Crea wiped a tear from his eyes, and turned away
to conceal his emotion, while Jurian continued looking
towards the city.
A boat at this time rowed along-side of the ship, and
'squire Morton, his daughter, and Miss Rebecca
ascended
to the deck. They were accompanied by
another
boat, containing Balcarras and M`Druid.
Here am I on shipboard again, exclaimed the
old 'squire, hobbling about the deck; I have not been
off terra firma these twenty years, but I could not resist
wishing the general a God speed you, on the very plank
that bears him from us.
And your fair daughter, I perceive, is as loyal as
yourself, replied the officer, who came forward to
welcome him.
Either loyalty or female curiosity induced her to
accompany me, exclaimed the 'squire, but I doubt
it is the latter. But where is the general? I must
trouble him with a few packages to my correspondents
in London, for though we live at the world's end, it is
necessary to remind them occasionally that we are not
quite out of the world yet.
He is in his cabin, sir, and will be at leisure in a
few moments.
Why do you droop, Agatha? continued the 'squire,
addressing his daughter. Come, rally your spirits;
all things should be joyous in spring, when nature puts
on her holyday dress to please us. Come, cheer up,
my child.
The revelry of yesterday still hangs as a cloud
upon her spirits, replied Balcarras.
Zounds, boy, how can that be, exclaimed the
'squire, since it has driven every thing like a cloud
from mine? There has not been such a spectacle since
the coronation of his majesty. I admit I felt a little
smoky about the brain when I arose, but that I
attribute
altogether to the infernal caterwauling that you
and your bagpipers kept under my windows about
daybreak
.
A serenade is bad enough at any time, but it
should be an indictable offence to turn a tune before
sunrise under any sober citizen's window, who has
been up till four upon a frolic.
Talking of serenades, brother. said Miss Buckley,
there was a custom among the ancient Chaldeans
Bury the Chaldeans, Becky, exclaimed the
'squire, and so deeply, that they may never rise
again to haunt me here. What have I done, that I
should be eternally persecuted by them! He then
turned to the officer, and demanded whether any of his
acquaintance designed making a voyage to England.
There stands a gentleman to whom you are
possibly
known, replied the officer, pointing at Jurian,
who still stood in the forecastle, with his face towards
the city.
'Squire Morton approached him, and Agatha,
trembling
,
hung upon his arm. The old man turned upon
his heel as he recognised Jurian.
I understood that you were acquainted, said the
officer, affecting not to perceive the change in the
'squire's deportment.
True, I have seen the boy before, and did hope
that it was for the last time.
Father you hear he is about to leave us.
The sooner the better; the sooner the better!
Why is it sir, said Jurian, that you retain your
rancour to the last? What have I been guilty of to
excite this animosity? Have I ever wronged you, or
ever departed from that respect which your years were
entitled to? If so, it has been when you have spurned
me in your pride, and awakened a momentary sense of
honest indignation. I am humbled now, and ask you
to forget it, for though I leave but few friends behind
me, I would leave no enemy.
When the ocean flows between us, all will be
forgotten
,
replied the old man.
Father, you loved him in his boyhood, said
Agatha
.
You must remember the delight you took in
tracing the gradual development of his mind, and how
often have you exclaimed, that he was a boy to be
proud of! You were happy in having him daily with
you, until he appeared on the footing of a companion,
in spite of the disparity of years.
True, he was a boy of promise, said the 'squire,
in a milder tone.
Has not that promise been realized? continued
Agatha. Is he not the man that you predicted? And
if so, what is it has changed your feelings towards
him?
His presumption.
True, I presumed to love your child, replied
Jurian
,
but my passion was as pure as that which your
own heart has conceived for her. Freed from every
thought that the disembodied spirit need reject, when
ascending to render in its last account. But before you
condemn, reflect, sir, who it was encouraged me to
presume. Your praises first taught me to know myself.
You unfolded to me the acquirements of a life of
experience
and study, and taught me to know the world, at
an age when it would have been bliss to have remained
in ignorance. It was you who first kindled the spark
of ambition in my bosom, and roused me to disdain the
humble sphere in which destiny had placed me.
I acknowledge the folly, and have since had cause
to repent of it.
You knew the human heart, continued Jurian,
and yet allowed me unrestrained intercourse with
that fair being, at a time when no worldly calculation
could enter our minds, to check the ardour of our
hopes. We were reared together from infancy. The
20*
distinction that the world has since taught me exists
between us, was not then recognised. We met as
equals, and little thought that the world would
pronounce
it presumption in me, and degradation on her
part, to love.
I have been to blame.
I need not advert to the injustice of proscribing
me for errors not my own, for you are too prejudiced
to call it injustice, and whether the merciless decree be
right or wrong, is now of little moment, for I go where
my name and history are unknown; still it would be a
satisfaction to learn, whether your mind was poisoned
against mefor she says you loved me onceby my
conduct, or by the stain upo me, for which another
must answer? Why do you turn from me, sir?
It is true, Jurian, that I did love you once, replied
the old man, with suppressed emotion.
Then what have I done to forfeit your esteem? I
admit that I have been guilty of both folly and crime,
but your heart was closed against me, before I was
conscious of either. Tell me your grievance. This
may be our last meeting, and before we part, I would
awaken, if possible, some feeling in the bosom that
loved me in my childhood.
You have succeeded, he replied, extending his
hand, which Jurian grasped with emotion. Go, boy,
and I shall rejoice to hear that you prosper.
I go with a lighter heart for this, said Jurian.
When the waters flow between us, you will be enabled
to reflect dispassionately upon the injustice that has
been done me, for I am no longer the moral agent that
nature intended me to be. Every feature of my mind
has been perverted by the arbitrary rules of man, which
too frequently defeat the benevolent intents of heaven,
and sit like Destiny in judgment upon their victims,
whom they lash with rods of iron, to the station they
have designed them to fill. You, sir, had the rod in
your own hand for a time, and spared not. But it is
past now, and I forgive you. Farewell.
The heart of the 'squire was mollified, and he again
stretched out his hand, which Jurian grasped, and then
turned to M`Crea
Father, I have brought tears into your eyes, and
sorrow to your heart, instead of smoothing the
downward
pathway of your life; but I regret it, and would
part from you as father and son should part. Your
hand. Protect my mother, and God grant that your
days may close in peace.
Shall I not accompany you? demanded M`Crea.
I have said that I go alone, he replied, and made
a few strides towards the gangway of the ship.
Leave us not yet, Jurian, leave us not yet,
exclaimed
Agatha, who had witnessed the foregoing in
silence, and with intense interest.
Agatha, farewell.
Go not yet, she cried, seizing hold of his arm,
we must not part. Was this world designed merely
for strangers to bustle in, and make a heartless journey,
until they sink to the earth beneath the weight of their
burden; or does it not rather become us to remove the
thorns from each others' pathway, and fly on as
cheerfully
as the birds to their place of rest? Our lives have
passed thus far together, Jurian, and it is too late to
part us now.
You should have spared me this. Other eyes are
upon us, Agatha, and I would not be placed upon the
rack for the amusement of the multitude. Recollect
where you are; be firm, and release your hold.
I cannotI cannot!
Agatha, my child, cried her father, is your brain
turned, that you speak thus wildly?
Not yet, father, but I fear it soon may be. I have
endured much, and patiently;I have obeyed you in
all things, and have struggled to conceal from your
eyes the anguish that obedience brought with it; but
this last trial forces me to speak, lest my heart break.
No more of this. Come away, my child, before
your weakness betray you to greater folly.
Father, my feelings towards him have grown with
my heart from infancy, until they have become
inseparable
from my nature. I look back, and as far as
memory
can carry me, his image appears; and am I now
doomed to look forward, and never hope to see it
again!
Infatuated girl!
He has been to me more than a brother, continued
Agatha, and can I now see him about to depart
friendless, sorrow-stricken, and alone, and suppress
every thing like emotion! It is not for myself I speak,
for gladly would I sacrifice my own feelings to see him
happy.
And the feelings of your father too, exclaimed
the old man, and all connected with you. Say,
misguided
girl, wilt thou, for a stranger to your blood, cast
off your friends and kindred, and desert him in his old
age, who has cherished you from your birth in the very
core of his heart?
Father, father!
You hesitate, and still cling to him. Ingrate, I am
answered. Go! And though I may not forget my lost
child as readily as she has forgotten me, still the grave
will prevent me from remembering long.
O! Jurian, I have never until now heard reproaches
from those lips, said Agatha, and fell upon his neck
to conceal her emotion. Her father continued
Is this the return for all my doating fondness!
Left in my old age, worse than childless,the remnant
of my life embittered with the recollection of the
ingratitude
of oneand the only one that could have
stung so deeply!
Cease your reproaches, sir, said Jurian, for
they are unmerited. She can never be guilty of the
perfidy of leaving you, for since she cannot part from
me without this agony, think you she could desert a
father, and such as you have been? Gladly would I
have prevented this trialit would have been better for
us both. I wished not to have witnessed those tears,
nor would I have had other eyes behold them. But it
has been ordered otherwise, and all that I could endure,
I have endured. There is your child again, and may
she soon cease to mourn for the loss of one who has
occasioned her little else than anguish. As he
concluded
,
he placed the almost insensible form of Agatha
in the arms of her father, who exclaimed, in
amazement
Do you not love her still, that you relinquish her?
Too fondlytoo devotedlyto condemn her to a
fate so dark as mine. I would not have even my worst
enemy share it, much less the being that I love.
Agatha
,
awake! You are in your father's arms. Banish
his fears, and tell him you will never leave him. Speak,
Agatha.
Father, I shall not part from you till death.
Thou art my own child again! exclaimed the old
man, pressing her to his bosom.
But how long will she remain so? demanded the
officer, who had procured Jurian admission to the
ship. She will not part from you till death, but
unless
you act as a father should, that promise does not
insure that you will keep her long.
What is it that you mean?
Can you not read it in that rayless eye and pallid
cheek? continued the officer, or will you await until
death has chilled the very fountain of life before you
perceive her danger. She has abandoned all her hopes
on earth for you, and cannot you make a trifling
sacrifice
to save a child?
What sacrifice?
Of pride, that would impel you to destroy her
peace and your own. You would bind her for life to
an empty name, and tell her to be happy. True, she
has been devoted to your wishes, but look on her, and
say whether you think she will obey you in that
command
.
The old man gazed on her pale face, as it rested on
his shoulder, and tears started in his eyes, when
Balcarras
approached and addressed him
Though late, let me do justice to the man I have
wronged. A braver never lived, and I with reason may
vouch for his chivalric sense of honour. I have loved
your daughter, but since my suit is hopeless, I shall
cease to molest her, and give place to one more
fortunate
,
and perhaps more deserving.
Brother, said Miss Buckley, you see even his
enemies plead for him.
He has no friends to plead for him! sighed
Agatha.
Come, old gentleman, cried M`Druid, do the
handsome thing at once, for it is better to heal hearts
any day than to break them. There was a time when
you loved the lad; he has talent, you say, is brave and
honourablebut then the poor fellow is unknown!
Botheration, never mind that, for with those
qualifications
he will soon remove the objection. Look at me,
sirI am, as old Adam was, the first of my race, and
the chances are even that in a few years he will be as
pretty a fellow as I am.
Jurian, come hither, cried the old man, after a
struggle. Gladly would I have kept my daughter
from you, that my ambition might have been gratified.
But that dream is over, and a father's feelings return.
Take her, she is thine.
Mine! An outcasta wanderer on the face of the
earth!
No outcast, but my son. Take her, I say, for she
is thine.
Thine, Jurian, thine, sighed Agatha, as her father
placed her in her lover's arms.
Yes, Agatha, thou shalt be mine, when reproach
shall cease to pursue my name, and even your father
may not be ashamed to place this treasured hand in
minebut not till then.
Jurian!
Not until then, Agatha; still, I have said, thou shalt
be mine.
Shortly after the events related above, the British
evacuated Philadelphia, and the battle of Monmouth
put a brilliant termination to the campaign. Jurian
abandoned the idea of leaving the country, and after
remaining a short time with Agatha, he availed himself
of the first opportunity of departing for the south, where
he joined the army, soon became distinguished for his
courage, and was rapidly promoted. He served until
peace was declared, some time prior to which he was
united to Agatha, with the full consent of her father,
and after throwing up his commission, he pursued his
profession with success and distinction. All the
enjoyments
that earth could proffer were spread before
him, but in the midst of all, the hapless Miriam was
not forgotten. There is no tie so powerful as that
which binds the living to the dead. All others may be
weakened in our progress through life; still, in joy or
in sorrow, that link remains the same as when first
riveted. No smile can dissolve it, and no tear corrode,
and it increases in strength, in proportion as all others
are weakened.
M`Druid, after the peace, returned to Europe, and
died, sword in hand, fighting against the French. The
first smiling face he met removed the impression made
upon his heart by the charms of Miss Buckley, but she
was more constant in her attachment, and for his sake,
died as true a virgin as queen Elizabeth. She, however,
lived long enough to become the president of a
charitable
association, where she managed to get all the
household linen made at half price, and receive the
widows' prayers in the bargain. The old 'squire, after
the peace, like many others, abandoned his tory
principles
,
and by way of setting an example to the
community
,
joined a temperance society. His conversion
was much talked of at the time, but on examining the
records of the society, I find that his name was on the
sick-list until the day of his death, and that his doctor
prescribed brandy, as the only medicine suited to his
disease.
Captain Swain lived long to enjoy the liberty he
had contended for, and the prosperity of Jurian.
M`Crea became an altered man, and banished from his
mind his philosophical researches, and instead of
studying
how to live, devoted the remnant of his days in
studying how to die. Alice survived the death of
Miriam
but a few months.
Corporal Drone, after the close of the war, became
a violent politician, and talked loudly in beer-houses of
the services he had rendered his country in the times
that tried men's souls. When Lafayette became the
nation's guest in 1824, the corporal was one of the old
soldiers who rode in the chariots that led the van of the
triumphal entry into Philadelphia, and when he was
afterwards introduced to the marquis in the Hall of
Independence, he endeavoured to awaken some
reminiscences
about the battles of Brandywine,
Germantown
,
and Swedes' Ford. The corporal's memory
appeared
to be more retentive than that of the other, who
was pushed so closely on that memorable occasion,
that at times he could afford nothing more than a bow
or a smile of recognition.
The corporal, we have said, was a violent politician,
and more than once was he brought forward by
designing
partisans as a candidate for some petty office,
and supported on the grounds of revolutionary
services
,
but he invariably failed in his election, which
caused him to inveigh more bitterly against the
ingratitude
of republics. He prosecuted Ephraim Horn for
the reward offered for the apprehension of Gordon, and
the cause having finally been removed to the Supreme
Court, it remains undecided to this day, as each judge
entertains his own peculiar opinion with regard to the
law on the subject.
THE END.