VOL. II. 1
LEGENDS OF THE PROVINCE HOUSE.
NUMBER I.
HOWE'S MASQUERADE.
One
afternoon, last summer, while walking along
Washington street, my eye was attracted by a
signboard
protruding over a narrow arch-way, nearly
opposite
the Old South Church. The sign represented
the front of a stately edifice, which was designated as
the "
Old Province House,
kept by Thomas Waite."
I was glad to be thus reminded of a purpose, long
entertained
,
of visiting and rambling over the mansion
of the old royal governors of Massachusetts; and
entering
the arched passage, which penetrated through
the middle of a brick row of shops, a few steps
transported
me from the busy heart of modern Boston, into
a small and secluded court-yard. One side of this
space was occupied by the square front of the Province
House, three stories high, and surmounted by a cupola,
on the top of which a gilded Indian was discernible,
with his bow bent and his arrow on the string, as if
aiming at the weathercock on the spire of the Old
South. The figure has kept this attitude for seventy
years or more, ever since good deacon Drowne, a
cunning carver of wood, first stationed him on his long
sentinel's watch over the city.
The Province House is constructed of brick, which
seems recently to have been overlaid with a coat of
light colored paint. A flight of red free-stone steps,
fenced in by a balustrade of curiously wrought iron,
ascends from the court-yard to the spacious porch,
over which is a balcony, with an iron balustrade of
similar pattern and workmanship to that beneath.
These letters and figures  16 P. S. 79  are wrought
into the iron work of the balcony, and probably
express
the date of the edifice, with the initials of its
founder's name. A wide door with double leaves
admitted me into the hall or entry, on the right of
which is the entrance to the bar-room.
It was in this apartment, I presume, that the ancient
governors held their levees, with vice-regal pomp,
surrounded by the military men, the counsellors, the
judges, and other officers of the crown, while all the
loyalty of the province thronged to do them honor.
But the room, in its present condition, cannot boast
even of faded magnificence. The paneled wainscot
is covered with dingy paint, and acquires a duskier
hue from the deep shadow into which the Province
House is thrown by the brick block that shuts it in from
Washington street. A ray of sunshine never visits
this apartment any more than the glare of the festal
torches, which have been extinguished from the era
of the revolution. The most venerable and
ornamental
object, is a chimney-piece set round with Dutch
tiles of blue-figured China, representing scenes from
Scripture; and, for aught I know, the lady of Pownall
or Bernard may have sate beside this fireplace, and
told her children the story of each blue tile. A bar
in modern style, well replenished with decanters,
bottles, cigar-boxes, and net-work bags of lemons,
and provided with a beer-pump and a soda-fount,
extends
along one side of the room. At my entrance,
an elderly person was smacking his lips, with a zest
which satisfied me that the cellars of the Province
House still hold good liquor, though doubtless of other
vintages than were quaffed by the old governors.
After sipping a glass of port-sangaree, prepared by
the skilful hands of Mr. Thomas Waite, I besought
that worthy successor and representative of so many
historic personages to conduct me over their
time-honored
mansion.
He readily complied; but, to confess the truth, I
was forced to draw strenuously upon my imagination,
in order to find aught that was interesting in a house
which, without its historic associations, would have
seemed merely such a tavern as is usually favored by
the custom of decent city boarders, and old fashioned
country gentlemen. The chambers, which were
probably
spacious in former times, are now cut up by
partitions, and subdivided into little nooks, each
affording
scanty room for the narrow bed, and chair,
and dressing table, of a single lodger. The great
staircase, however, may be termed, without much
hyperbole, a feature of grandeur and magnificence.
It winds through the midst of the house by flights of
broad steps, each flight terminating in a square
landing-place
,
whence the ascent is continued towards the
cupola. A carved balustrade, freshly painted in the
lower stories, but growing dingier as we ascend,
borders
the staircase with its quaintly twisted and
intertwined
pillars, from top to bottom. Up these stairs
the military boots, or perchance the gouty shoes of
many a governor have trodden, as the wearers mounted
to the cupola, which afforded them so wide a view
over their metropolis and the surrounding country.
The cupola is an octagon, with several windows, and
a door opening upon the roof. From this station, as
I pleased myself with imagining, Gage may have
beheld his disastrous victory on Bunker Hill, (unless
one of the tri-mountains intervened), and Howe have
marked the approaches of Washington's besieging
army; although the buildings, since erected in the
vicinity, have shut out almost every object, save the
steeple of the Old South, which seems almost within
arm's length. Descending from the cupola, I paused
in the garret to observe the ponderous white-oak
frame-work, so much more massive than the frames
of modern houses, and thereby resembling an antique
skeleton. The brick walls, the materials of which
were imported from Holland, and the timbers of the
mansion, are still as sound as ever; but the floors and
other interior parts being greatly decayed, it is
contemplated
to gut the whole, and build a new house
within the ancient frame and brick work. Among
other inconveniences of the present edifice, mine host
mentioned that any jar or motion was apt to shake
down the dust of ages out of the ceiling of one
chamber
upon the floor of that beneath it.
We stepped forth from the great front window into
the balcony, where, in old times, it was doubtless the
custom of the king's representative to show himself to
a loyal populace, requiting their huzzas and tossed-up
hats with stately bendings of his dignified person.
In those days, the front of the Province House looked
upon the street; and the whole site now occupied by
the brick range of stores, as well as the present
courtyard
,
was laid out in grass plats, overshadowed by
trees and bordered by a wrought iron fence. Now,
the old aristocratic edifice hides its time-worn visage
behind an upstart modern building; at one of the
back windows I observed some pretty tailoresses,
sewing, and chatting, and laughing, with now and
then a careless glance towards the balcony.
Descending
thence, we again entered the bar-room, where the
elderly gentleman above mentioned, the smack of
whose lips had spoken so favorably for Mr. Waite's
good liquor, was still lounging in his chair. He seemed
to be, if not a lodger, at least a familiar visiter of the
house, who might be supposed to have his regular
score at the bar, his summer seat at the open window,
and his prescriptive corner at the winter's fireside.
Being of a sociable aspect, I ventured to address him
with a remark, calculated to draw forth his historical
reminiscences, if any such were in his mind; and it
gratified me to discover, that, between memory and
tradition, the old gentleman was really possessed of
some very pleasant gossip about the Province House.
The portion of his talk which chiefly interested me,
was the outline of the following legend. He professed
to have received it at one or two removes from an
eye-witness; but this derivation, together with the
lapse of time, must have afforded opportunities for
many variations of the narrative; so that, despairing
of literal and absolute truth, I have not scrupled to
make such further changes as seemed conducive to
the reader's profit and delight.
At one of the entertainments given at the Province
House, during the latter part of the siege of Boston,
there passed a scene which has never yet been
satisfactorily
explained. The officers of the British army,
and the loyal gentry of the province, most of whom
were collected within the beleagured town, had been
invited to a masqued ball; for it was the policy of
Sir William Howe to hide the distress and danger of
the period, and the desperate aspect of the siege,
under
an ostentation of festivity. The spectacle of this
evening, if the oldest members of the provincial court
circle might be believed, was the most gay and
gorgeous
affair that had occurred in the annals of the
government. The brilliantly lighted apartments were
thronged with figures that seemed to have stepped
from the dark canvass of historic portraits, or to have
flitted forth from the magic pages of romance, or at
least to have flown hither from one of the London
theatres, without a change of garments. Steeled
knights of the Conquest, bearded statesmen of Queen
Elizabeth, and high-ruffled ladies of her court, were
mingled with characters of comedy, such as a
particolored
Merry Andrew, jingling his cap and bells; a
Falstaffe, almost as provocative of laughter as his
prototype; and a Don Quixote, with a bean-pole for
a lance, and a pot-lid for a shield.
But the broadest merriment was excited by a
group of figures ridiculously dressed in old
regimentals
,
which seemed to have been purchased at
a military rag-fair, or pilfered from some receptacle
of the cast-off clothes of both the French and British
armies. Portions of their attire had probably been
worn at the siege of Louisburg, and the coats of most
recent cut might have been rent and tattered by
sword, ball, or bayonet, as long ago as Wolfe's
victory
.
One of these worthies  a tall, lank figure,
brandishing a rusty sword of immense longitude
purported to be no less a personage than General
George Washington; and the other principal officers
of the American army, such as Gates, Lee, Putnam,
Schuyler, Ward and Heath, were represented by
similar scare-crows. An interview in the mock
heroic
style, between the rebel warriors and the British
commander-in-chief, was received with immense
applause
,
which came loudest of all from the loyalists
of the colony. There was one of the guests,
however
,
who stood apart, eyeing these antics sternly
and scornfully, at once with a frown and a bitter
smile.
It was an old man, formerly of high station and
great repute in the province, and who had been a
very famous soldier in his day. Some surprise had
been expressed, that a person of Colonel Joliffe's
known whig principles, though now too old to take an
active part in the contest, should have remained in
Boston during the siege, and especially that he should
consent to show himself in the mansion of Sir
William
Howe. But thither he had come, with a fair
grand-daughter under his arm; and there, amid all
the mirth and buffoonery, stood this stern old figure,
the best sustained character in the masquerade,
because
so well representing the antique spirit of his
native land. The other guests affirmed that Colonel
Joliffe's black puritanical scowl threw a shadow round
about him; although in spite of his sombre influence,
their gaiety continued to blaze higher, like  (an
ominous
comparison)  the flickering brilliancy of a
lamp which has but a little while to burn. Eleven
strokes, full half an hour ago, had pealed from the
clock of the Old South, when a rumor was circulated
among the company that some new spectacle or
pageant
was about to be exhibited, which should put a
fitting close to the splendid festivities of the night.
`What new jest has your Excellency in hand?'
asked the Reverend Mather Byles, whose
Presbyterian
scruples had not kept him from the entertainment.
`Trust me, sir, I have already laughed more than
beseems my cloth, at your Homeric confabulation
with yonder ragamuffin General of the rebels. One
other such fit of merriment, and I must throw off my
clerical wig and band.'
`Not so, good Doctor Byles,' answered Sir
William
Howe; `if mirth were a crime, you had never
gained your doctorate in divinity. As to this new
foolery, I know no more about it than yourself;
perhaps
not so much. Honestly now, Doctor, have you
not stirred up the sober brains of some of your
countrymen
to enact a scene in our masquerade?'
`Perhaps,' slyly remarked the grand-daughter of
Colonel Joliffe, whose high spirit had been stung by
many taunts against New England  `perhaps we
are to have a masque of allegorical figures.
Victory
,
with trophies from Lexington and Bunker Hill.
Plenty, with her overflowing horn, to typify the
present
abundance in this good town  and Glory, with a
wreath for his Excellency's brow.'
Sir William Howe smiled at words which he would
have answered with one of his darkest frowns, had
they been uttered by lips that wore a beard. He was
spared the necessity of a retort, by a singular
interruption
.
A sound of music was heard without the
house, as if proceeding from a full band of military
instruments stationed in the street, playing not such a
festal strain as was suited to the occasion; but a slow
funeral march. The drums appeared to be muffled,
and the trumpets poured forth a wailing breath, which
at once hushed the merriment of the auditors, filling
all with wonder, and some with apprehension. The
idea occurred to many, that either the funeral
procession
of some great personage had halted in front of
the Province House, or that a corpse, in a
velvet-covered
and gorgeously decorated coffin, was about to
be borne from the portal. After listening a moment,
Sir William Howe called, in a stern voice, to the
leader of the musicians, who had hitherto enlivened
the entertainment with gay and lightsome melodies.
The man was drum-major to one of the British
regiments
.
`Dighton,' demanded the General, `what means
this foolery? Bid your hand silence that dead
march  or, by my word, they shall have sufficient
cause for their lugubrious strains! Silence it, sirrah!'
`Please your honor,' answered the drum-major,
whose rubicund visage had lost all its color, `the
fault is none of mine. I and my band are all here
together; and I question whether there be a man of
us that could play that march without book. I never
heard it but once before, and that was at the funeral
of his late Majesty, King George the Second.'
`Well, well!' said Sir William Howe, recovering
his composure  `it is the prelude to some
masquerading
antic. Let it pass.'
A figure now presented itself, but among the many
fantastic masks that were dispersed through the
apartments
,
none could tell precisely from whence it came.
It was a man in an old fashioned dress of black serge,
and having the aspect of a steward, or principal
domestic in the household of a nobleman, or great
English landholder. This figure advanced to the
outer door of the mansion, and throwing both its leaves
wide open, withdrew a little to one side and looked
back towards the grand staircase, as if expecting some
person to descend. At the same time, the music in
the street sounded a loud and doleful summons. The
eyes of Sir William Howe and his guests being
directed to the staircase, there appeared, on the
uppermost
landing-place that was discernible from the
bottom, several personages descending towards the
door. The foremost was a man of stern visage,
wearing a steeple-crowned hat and a skull-cap
beneath
it; a dark cloak, and huge wrinkled boots that
came half way up his legs. Under his arm was a
rolled-up banner, which seemed to be the banner of
England, but strangely rent and torn; he had a sword
in his right hand, and grasped a Bible in his left.
The next figure was of milder aspect, yet full of
dignity, wearing a broad ruff, over which descended
a beard, a gown of wrought velvet, and a doublet and
hose of black satin. He carried a roll of manuscript
in his hand. Close behind these two, came a young
man of very striking countenance and demeanor, with
deep thought and contemplation on his brow, and
perhaps a flash of enthusiasm in his eye. His garb,
like that of his predecessors, was of an antique
fashion
,
and there was a stain of blood upon his ruff. In
the same group with these, were three or four others,
all men of dignity and evident command, and
bearing
themselves like personages who were accustomed
to the gaze of the multitude. It was the idea of the
beholders, that these figures went to join the
mysterious
funeral that had halted in front of the Province
House; yet that supposition seemed to be
contradicted
by the air of triumph with which they waved their
hands, as they crossed the threshold and vanished
through the portal.
`In the devil's name, what is this?' muttered Sir
William Howe to a gentleman beside him; `a
procession
of the regicide judges of King Charles the
martyr?'
`These,' said Colonel Joliffe, breaking silence
almost
for the first time that evening  `these, if I
interpret
them aright, are the Puritan governors  the
rulers of the old, original Democracy of
Massachusetts
.
Endicott, with the banner from which he had
torn the symbol of subjection, and Winthrop, and Sir
Henry Vane, and Dudley, Haynes, Bellingham, and
Leverett.'
`Why had that young man a stain of blood upon
his ruff?' asked Miss Joliffe.
`Because, in after years,' answered her
grandfather
,
`he laid down the wisest head in England
upon the block, for the principles of liberty.'
`Will not your Excellency order out the guard?'
whispered Lord Percy, who, with other British
officers
,
had now assembled round the General. `There
may be a plot under this mummery.'
`Tush! we have nothing to fear,' carelessly replied
Sir William Howe. `There can be no worse
treason
in the matter than a jest, and that somewhat of
the dullest. Even were it a sharp and bitter one, our
best policy would be to laugh it off. See  here
come more of these gentry.'
Another group of characters had now partly
descended
the staircase. The first was a venerable and
white-bearded patriarch, who cautiously felt his way
downward with a staff. Treading hastily behind him,
and stretching forth his gauntleted hand as if to grasp
the old man's shoulder, came a tall, soldier-like figure,
equipped with a plumed cap of steel, a bright
breastplate
,
and a long sword, which rattled against the
stairs. Next was seen a stout man, dressed in rich
and courtly attire, but not of courtly demeanor; his
gait had the swinging motion of a seaman's walk;
and chancing to stumble on the staircase, he suddenly
grew wrathful, and was heard to mutter an oath. He
was followed by a noble-looking personage in a curled
wig, such as are represented in the portraits of Queen
Anne's time and earlier; and the breast of his coat
was decorated with an embroidered star. While
advancing
to the door, he bowed to the right hand and
to the left, in a very gracious and insinuating style;
but as he crossed the threshold, unlike the early
Puritan governors, he seemed, to wring his hands with
sorrow.
`Prithee, play the part of a chorus, good Doctor
Byles,' said Sir William Howe. `What worthies are
these?'
`If it please your Excellency, they lived
somewhat
before my day,' answered the doctor; `but
doubtless our friend, the Colonel, has been hand and
glove with them.'
`Their living faces I never looked upon,' said
Colonel Joliffe, gravely; `although I have spoken
face to face with many rulers of this land, and shall
greet yet another with an old man's blessing, ere I
die. But we talk of these figures. I take the
venerable
patriarch to be Bradstreet, the last of the
Puritans
,
who was governor at ninety, or thereabouts.
The next is Sir Edmund Andros, a tyrant, as any
New England school-boy will tell you; and therefore
the people cast him down from his high seat into a
dungeon. Then comes Sir William Phips, shepherd,
cooper, sea-captain and governor  may many of his
countrymen rise as high, from as low an origin!
Lastly, you saw the gracious Earl of Bellamont, who
ruled us under King William.'
`But what is the meaning of it all?' asked Lord
Percy.
`Now, were I a rebel,' said Miss Joliffe, half aloud,
`I might fancy that the ghosts of these ancient
governors
had been summoned to form the funeral
procession
of royal authority in New England.'
Several other figures were now seen at the turn
of the staircase. The one in advance had a
thoughtful
,
anxious, and somewhat crafty expression of face;
and in spite of his loftiness of manner, which was
evidently the result both of an ambitious spirit and of
long continuance in high stations, he seemed not
incapable
of cringing to a greater than himself. A few
steps behind came an officer in a scarlet and
embroidered
uniform, cut in a fashion old enough to have
been worn by the Duke of Marlborough. His nose
had a rubicund tinge, which, together with the
twinkle
of his eye, might have marked him as a lover
of the wine cup and good fellowship;
notwithstanding
which tokens, he appeared ill at ease, and often
glanced around him, as if apprehensive of some secret
mischief. Next came a portly gentleman, wearing a
VOL. II. 2
coat of shaggy cloth, lined with silken velvet; he
had sense, shrewdness, and humor in his face, and a
folio volume under his arm; but his aspect was that
of a man vexed and tormented beyond all patience,
and harassed almost to death. He went hastily
down, and was followed by a dignified person, dressed
in a purple velvet suit, with very rich embroidery;
his demeanor would have possessed much stateliness,
only that a grievous fit of the gout compelled him to
hobble from stair to stair, with contortions of face and
body. When Doctor Byles beheld this figure on the
staircase, he shivered as with an ague, but continued to
watch him steadfastly, until the gouty gentleman had
reached the threshold, made a gesture of anguish and
despair, and vanished into the outer gloom, whither
the funeral music summoned him.
`Governor Belcher!  my old patron!  in his
very shape and dress!' gasped Doctor Byles. `This
is an awful mockery!'
`A tedious foolery, rather,' said Sir William Howe,
with an air of indifference. `But who were the three
that preceded him?'
`Governor Dudley, a cunning politician  yet his
craft once brought him to a prison,' replied Colonel
Joliffe. `Governor Shute, formerly a Colonel under
Marlborough, and whom the people frightened out of
the province; and learned Governor Burnet, whom
the legislature tormented into a mortal fever.'
`Methinks they were miserable men, these royal
governors of Massachusetts," observed Miss Joliffe.
`Heavens, how dim the light grows!'
It was certainly a fact that the large lamp which
illuminated the staircase, now burned dim and
duskily
:
so that several figures, which passed hastily down
the stairs and went forth from the porch, appeared
rather like shadows than persons of fleshly substance.
Sir William Howe and his guests stood at the doors
of the contiguous apartments, watching the progress
of this singular pageant, with various emotions of
anger, contempt, or half acknowledged fear, but still
with an anxious curiosity. The shapes, which now
seemed hastening to join the mysterious procession,
were recognised rather by striking peculiarities of
dress, or broad characteristics of manner, than by any
perceptible resemblance of features to their
prototypes
.
Their faces, indeed, were invariably kept in
deep shadow. But Doctor Byles, and other
gentlemen
who had long been familiar with the successive
rulers of the province, were heard to whisper the
names of Shirley, of Pownal, of Sir Francis
Bernard
,
and of the well remembered Hutchinson;
thereby
confessing that the actors, whoever they might be,
in this spectral march of governors, had succeeded in
putting on some distant portraiture of the real
personages
.
As they vanished from the door, still did these
shadows toss their arms into the gloom of night, with
a dread expression of wo. Following the mimic
representative
of Hutchinson, came a military figure,
holding before his face the cocked hat which he had
taken from his powdered head; but his epaulettes
and other insignia of rank were those of a general
officer; and something in his mien reminded the
beholders
of one who had recently been master of the
Province House, and chief of all the land.
`The shape of Gage, as true as in a looking glass,'
exclaimed Lord Percy, turning pale.
`No, surely,' cried Miss Joliffe, laughing
hysterically
;
`it could not be Gage, or Sir William would
have greeted his old comrade in arms! Perhaps he
will not suffer the next to pass unchallenged.'
`Of that be assured, young lady,' answered Sir
William Howe, fixing his eyes, with a very marked
expression, upon the immovable visage of her
grandfather
.
`I have long enough delayed to pay the
ceremonies of a host to these departing guests. The
next that takes his leave shall receive due courtesy.'
A wild and dreary burst of music came through
the open door. It seemed as if the procession, which
had been gradually filling up its ranks, were now
about to move, and that this loud peal of the
wailing
trumpets, and roll of the muffled drums, were
a call to some loiterer to make haste. Many eyes,
by an irresistible impulse, were turned upon Sir
William
Howe, as if it were he whom the dreary music
summoned to the funeral of departed power.
`See!  here comes the last!' whispered Miss
Joliffe
,
pointing her tremulous finger to the staircase.
A figure had come into view as if descending the
stairs; although so dusky was the region whence it
emerged, some of the spectators fancied that they had
seen this human shape suddenly moulding itself amid
the gloom. Downward the figure came, with a
stately
and martial tread, and reaching the lowest stair
was observed to be a tall man, booted and wrapped
in a military cloak, which was drawn up around the
face so as to meet the flapped brim of a laced hat.
The features, therefore, were completely hidden.
But the British officers deemed that they had seen
that military cloak before, and even recognised the
frayed embroidery on the collar, as well as the gilded
scabbard of a sword which protruded from the folds
of the cloak, and glittered in a vivid gleam of light.
Apart from these trifling particulars there were
characteristics
of gait and bearing, which impelled the
wondering guests to glance from the shrouded figure
to Sir William Howe, as if to satisfy themselves that
their host had not suddenly vanished from the midst
of them.
With a dark flush of wrath upon his brow, they saw
the General draw his sword and advance to meet the
figure in the cloak before the latter had stepped one
pace upon the floor.
`Villain, unmuffle yourself!' cried he. `You
pass no further!'
The figure, without blenching a hair's breadth from
the sword which was pointed at his breast, made a
solemn pause and lowered the cape of the cloak from
about his face, yet not sufficiently for the spectators
to catch a glimpse of it. But Sir William Howe had
evidently seen enough. The sternness of his
countenance
gave place to a look of wild amazement, if not
horror, while he recoiled several steps from the figure,
and let fall his sword upon the floor. The martial
shape again drew the cloak about his features and
passed on; but reaching the threshold, with his back
towards the spectators, he was seen to stamp his
foot and shake his clenched hands in the air. It
was afterwards affirmed that Sir William Howe had
repeated that self-same gesture of rage and sorrow,
when, for the last time, and as the last royal
governor
,
he passed through the portal of the Province
House.
`Hark!  the procession moves,' said Miss Joliffe.
The music was dying away along the street, and
its dismal strains were mingled with the knell of
midnight
from the steeple of the Old South, and with the
roar of artillery, which announced that the
beleaguering
army of Washington had intrenched itself upon
a nearer height than before. As the deep boom of
the cannon smote upon his ear, Colonel Joliffe raised
himself to the full height of his aged form, and smiled
sternly on the British General.
`Would your Excellency inquire further into the
mystery of the pageant?' said he.
`Take care of your gray head!' cried Sir
William
Howe, fiercely, though with a quivering lip.
`It has stood too long on a traitor's shoulders!'
`You must make haste to chop it off, then,'
calmly replied the Colonel; `for a few hours longer,
and not all the power of Sir William Howe, nor of his
master, shall cause one of these gray hairs to fall.
The empire of Britain, in this ancient province, is at
its last gasp to-night;  almost while I speak it is a
dead corpse;  and methinks the shadows of the old
governors are fit mourners at its funeral!'
With these words Colonel Joliffe threw on his
cloak, and drawing his grand-daughter's arm within
his own, retired from the last festival that a British
ruler ever held in the old province of Massachusetts
Bay. It was supposed that the Colonel and the
young lady possessed some secret intelligence in
regard
to the mysterious pageant of that night.
However
this might be, such knowledge has never become
general. The actors in the scene have vanished into
deeper obscurity than even that wild Indian band who
scattered the cargoes of the tea ships on the waves,
and gained a place in history, yet left no names.
But superstition, among other legends of this
mansion
,
repeats the wondrous tale, that on the
anniversary
night of Britain's discomfiture, the ghosts of the
ancient governors of Massachusetts still glide through
the portal of the Province House. And, last of all,
comes a figure shrouded in a military cloak, tossing
his clenched hands into the air, and stamping his
iron-shod boots upon the broad free-stone steps, with
a semblance of feverish despair, but without the
sound of a foot-tramp.
When the truth-telling accents of the elderly
gentleman
were hushed, I drew a long breath and looked
round the room, striving, with the best energy of my
imagination, to throw a tinge of romance and historic
grandeur over the realities of the scene. But my
nostrils snuffed up a scent of cigar-smoke, clouds of
which the narrator had emitted by way of visible
emblem, I suppose, of the nebulous obscurity of his
tale. Moreover, my gorgeous fantasies were wofully
disturbed by the rattling of the spoon in a tumbler of
whisky punch, which Mr. Thomas Waite was
mingling
for a customer. Nor did it add to the picturesque
appearance of the paneled walls, that the slate of
the Brookline stage was suspended against them,
instead of the armorial escutcheon of some
far-descended
governor. A stage-driver sat at one of
the windows, reading a penny paper of the day
the Boston Times  and presenting a figure which
could nowise be brought into any picture of `Times
in Boston,' seventy or a hundred years ago. On
the window-seat lay a bundle, neatly done up in
brown paper, the direction of which I had the idle
curiosity to read. "Miss
Susan Huggins,
at the
Province House.
" A pretty chamber-maid, no
doubt. In truth, it is desperately hard work, when
we attempt to throw the spell of hoar antiquity over
localities with which the living world, and the day
that is passing over us, have aught to do. Yet, as I
glanced at the stately staircase, down which the
procession
of the old governors had descended, and as I
emerged through the venerable portal, whence their
figures had preceded me, it gladdened me to be
conscious
of a thrill of awe. Then diving through the
narrow archway, a few strides transported me into
the densest throng of Washington street.
NUMBER II.
EDWARD RANDOLPH'S PORTRAIT.
The
old legendary guest of the Province House
abode in my remembrance from mid-summer till
January
.
One idle evening, last winter, confident that
he would be found in the snuggest corner of the
barroom
,
I resolved to pay him another visit, hoping to
deserve well of my country by snatching from oblivion
some else unheard of fact of history. The night was
chill and raw, and rendered boisterous by almost a
gale of wind, which whistled along Washington street,
causing the gas-lights to flare and flicker within the
lamps. As I hurried onward, my fancy was busy
with a comparison between the present aspect of the
street, and that which it probably wore when the
British
Governors inhabited the mansion whither I was
now going. Brick edifices in those times were few,
till a succession of destructive fires had swept, and
swept again, the wooden dwellings and ware-houses
from the most populous quarters of the town. The
buildings stood insulated and independent, not, as now,
merging their separate existences into connected
ranges, with a front of tiresome identity,  but each
possessing features of its own, as if the owner's
individual
taste had shaped it,  and the whole
presenting
a picturesque irregularity, the absence of which
is hardly compensated by any beauties of our modern
architecture. Such a scene, dimly vanishing from the
eye by the ray of here and there a tallow candle,
glimmering through the small panes of scattered
windows
,
would form a sombre contrast to the street, as I
beheld it, with the gas-lights blazing from corner to
corner, flaming within the shops, and throwing a
noonday
brightness through the huge plates of glass.
But the black, lowering sky, as I turned my eyes
upward, wore, doubtless, the same visage as when it
frowned upon the ante-revolutionary New Englanders.
The wintry blast had the same shriek that was
familiar
to their ears. The Old South church, too, still
pointed its antique spire into the darkness, and was
lost between earth and heaven; and as I passed, its
clock, which had warned so many generations how
transitory was their life-time, spoke heavily and slow
the same unregarded moral to myself. `Only seven
o'clock,' thought I. `My old friend's legends will
scarcely kill the hours 'twixt this and bed-time.'
Passing through the narrow arch, I crossed the
court-yard, the confined precincts of which were
made visible by a lantern over the portal of the
Province House. On entering the bar-room, I found,
as I expected, the old tradition-monger seated by a
special good fire of anthracite, compelling clouds of
smoke from a corpulent cigar. He recognised me
with evident pleasure; for my rare properties as a
patient listener invariably make me a favorite with
elderly gentlemen and ladies of narrative
propensities
.
Drawing a chair to the fire, I desired mine host
to favor us with a glass a-piece of whisky punch,
which was speedily prepared, steaming hot, with a
slice of lemon at the bottom, a dark-red stratum of
port wine upon the surface, and a sprinkling of
nutmeg
strewn over all. As we touched our glasses
together
,
my legendary friend made himself known to
me as Mr. Bela Tiffany; and I rejoiced at the oddity
of the name, because it gave his image and character
a sort of individuality in my conception. The old
gentleman's draught acted as a solvent upon his
memory
,
so that it overflowed with tales, traditions,
anecdotes
of famous dead people, and traits of ancient
manners, some of which were childish as a nurse's
lullaby, while others might have been worth the notice
of the grave historian. Nothing impressed me more
than a story of a black, mysterious picture, which
used to hang in one of the chambers of the Province
House, directly above the room where we were now
sitting. The following is as correct a version of the
fact as the reader would be likely to obtain from any
other source, although assuredly, it has a tinge of
romance approaching to the marvellous:
In one of the apartments of the Province House
there was long preserved an ancient picture, the frame
of which was as black as ebony, and the canvas itself
so dark with age, damp, and smoke, that not a touch of
the painter's art could be discerned. Time had thrown
an impenetrable veil over it, and left to tradition, and
fable, and conjecture, to say what had once been there
portrayed. During the rule of many successive
governors
,
it had hung, by prescriptive and undisputed
right, over the mantelpiece of the same chamber;
and it still kept its place when Lieutenant Governor
Hutchinson assumed the administration of the province,
on the departure of Sir Francis Bernard.
The Lieutenant Governor sat, one afternoon, resting
his head against the carved back of his stately arm
chair, and gazing up thoughtfully at the void blackness
of the picture. It was scarcely a time for such inactive
musing, when affairs of the deepest moment required
the ruler's decision; for, within that very hour,
Hutchinson
had received intelligence of the arrival of a
British fleet, bringing three regiments from Halifax to
overawe the insubordination of the people. These
troops awaited his permission to occupy the fortress
of Castle William, and the town itself. Yet, instead
of affixing his signature to an official order, there sat
the Lieutenant Governor, so carefully scrutinizing the
black waste of canvas, that his demeanor attracted
the notice of two young persons who attended him.
One, wearing a military dress of buff, was his
kinsman
,
Francis Lincoln, the Provincial Captain of Castle
William; the other, who sat on a low stool beside his
chair, was Alice Vane, his favorite niece.
She was clad entirely in white, a pale, ethereal
creature, who, though a native of New England, had
been educated abroad, and seemed not merely a
stranger
from another clime, but almost a being from
another
world. For several years, until left an orphan,
she had dwelt with her father in sunny Italy, and there
had acquired a taste and enthusiasm for sculpture and
painting, which she found few opportunities of
gratifying
in the undecorated dwellings of the colonial gentry.
It was said that the early productions of her own
pencil exhibited no inferior genius, though, perhaps,
the rude atmosphere of New England had cramped
her hand, and dimmed the glowing colors of her fancy.
But observing her uncle's steadfast gaze, which
appeared
to search through the mist of years to discover
the subject of the picture, her curiosity was excited.
`Is it known, my dear uncle,' inquired she, `what
this old picture once represented? Possibly, could it
be made visible, it might prove a masterpiece of some
great artist  else why has it so long held such a
conspicuous
place?'
As her uncle, contrary to his usual custom, (for he
was as attentive to all the humors and caprices of
Alice as if she had been his own best beloved child,)
did not immediately reply, the young Captain of Castle
William took that office upon himself.
`This dark old square of canvas, my fair cousin,'
said he, `has been an heir-loom in the Province House
from time immemorial. As to the painter, I can tell
you nothing; but, if half the stories told of it be true,
not one of the great Italian masters has ever produced
so marvellous a piece of work, as that before you.'
Captain Lincoln proceeded to relate some of the
strange fables and fantasies, which, as it was
impossible
to refute them by ocular demonstration, had
grown to be articles of popular belief, in reference
to this old picture. One of the wildest, and at the
same time the best accredited accounts, stated it to
be an original and authentic portrait of the Evil One,
taken at a witch meeting near Salem; and that its
strong and terrible resemblance had been confirmed
by several of the confessing wizards and witches, at
their trial, in open court. It was likewise affirmed
that a familiar spirit, or demon, abode behind the
blackness of the picture, and had shown himself, at
seasons of public calamity, to more than one of the
royal governors. Shirley, for instance, had beheld
this ominous apparition, on the eve of General
Abercrombie's shameful and bloody defeat under the
walls of Ticonderoga. Many of the servants of the
Province House had caught glimpses of a visage
frowning down upon them, at morning or evening
twilight,  or in the depths of night, while raking up
the fire that glimmered on the hearth beneath;
although
,
if any were bold enough to hold a torch
before the picture, it would appear as black and
undistinguishable
as ever. The oldest inhabitant of
Boston recollected that his father, in whose days the
portrait had not wholly faded out of sight, had once
looked upon it, but would never suffer himself to be
questioned as to the face which was there represented.
In connection with such stories, it was remarkable
that over the top of the frame there were some
ragged
VOL. II. 3
remnants of black silk, indicating that a veil had
formerly hung down before the picture, until the
duskiness of time had so effectually concealed it.
But, after all, it was the most singular part of the
affair, that so many of the pompous governors of
Massachusetts had allowed the obliterated picture to
remain in the state-chamber of the Province House.
`Some of these fables are really awful,' observed
Alice Vane, who had occasionally shuddered, as well
as smiled, while her cousin spoke. `It would be
almost
worth while to wipe away the black surface of
the canvas, since the original picture can hardly be
so formidable as those which fancy paints instead
of it.'
`But would it be possible,' inquired her cousin, `to
restore this dark picture to its pristine hues?'
`Such arts are known in Italy,' said Alice.
The Lieutenant Governor had roused himself from
his abstracted mood, and listened with a smile to the
conversation of his young relatives. Yet his voice
had something peculiar in its tones, when he undertook
the explanation of the mystery.
`I am sorry, Alice, to destroy your faith in the
legends of which you are so fond,' remarked he;
`but my antiquarian researches have long since made
me acquainted with the subject of this picture  if
picture it can be called  which is no more visible,
nor ever will be, than the face of the long buried
man whom it once represented. It was the portrait
of Edward Randolph, the founder of this house, a
person famous in the history of New England.'
`Of that Edward Randolph,' exclaimed Captain
Lincoln, `who obtained the repeal of the first
provincial
charter, under which our forefathers had enjoyed
almost democratic privileges! He that was styled the
arch enemy of New England, and whose memory is
still held in detestation, as the destroyer of our
liberties
!'
`It was the same Randolph,' answered Hutchinson,
moving uneasily in his chair. `It was his lot to taste
the bitterness of popular odium.'
`Our annals tell us,' continued the Captain of Castle
William, `that the curse of the people followed this
Randolph where he went, and wrought evil in all the
subsequent events of his life, and that its effect was
seen likewise in the manner of his death. They say,
too, that the inward misery of that curse worked itself
outward, and was visible on the wretched man's
countenance
,
making it too horrible to be looked upon.
If so, and if this picture truly represented his aspect,
it was in mercy that the cloud of blackness has
gathered
over it.'
`These traditions are folly, to one who has proved,
as I have, how little of historic truth lies at the
bottom
,'
said the Lieutenant Governor. `As regards the
life and character of Edward Randolph too implicit
credence has been given to Dr. Cotton Mather, who
I must say it, though some of his blood runs in my
veins  has filled our early history with old women's
tales, as fanciful and extravagant as those of Greece
or Rome.'
`And yet,' whispered Alice Vane, `may not such
fables have a moral? And methinks, if the visage
of this portrait be so dreadful, it is not without a
cause that it has hung so long in a chamber of the
Province House. When the rulers feel themselves
irresponsible, it were well that they should be
reminded
of the awful weight of a people's curse.'
The Lieutenant Governor started, and gazed for a
moment at his niece, as if her girlish fantasies had
struck upon some feeling in his own breast, which all
his policy or principles could not entirely subdue.
He knew, indeed, that Alice, in spite of her foreign
education, retained the native sympathies of a New
England girl.
`Peace, silly child,' cried he, at last, more harshly
than he had ever before addressed the gentle Alice.
`The rebuke of a king is more to be dreaded than the
clamor of a wild, misguided multitude. Captain
Lincoln
,
it is decided. The fortress of Castle William
must be occupied by the Royal troops. The two
remaining
regiments shall be billeted in the town, or
encamped upon the Common. It is time, after years
of tumult, and almost rebellion, that his majesty's
government should have a wall of strength about it.'
`Trust, sir  trust yet awhile to the loyalty of the
people,' said Captain Lincoln; `nor teach them that
they can ever be on other terms with British soldiers
than those of brotherhood, as when they fought side
by side through the French war. Do not convert the
streets of your native town into a camp. Think twice
before you give up old Castle William, the key of the
province, into other keeping than that of true born
New Englanders.'
`Young man, it is decided,' repeated Hutchinson,
rising from his chair. `A British officer will be in
attendance this evening, to receive the necessary
instructions
for the disposal of the troops. Your
presence
also will be required. Till then, farewell.'
With these words the Lieutenant Governor hastily
left the room, while Alice and her cousin more slowly
followed, whispering together, and once pausing to
glance back at the mysterious picture. The captain
of Castle William fancied that the girl's air and mien
were such as might have belonged to one of those
spirits of fable  fairies, or creatures of a more
antique
mythology,  who sometimes mingled their
agency with mortal affairs, half in caprice, yet with
a sensibility to human weal or woe. As he held the
door for her to pass, Alice beckoned to the picture
and smiled.
`Come forth, dark and evil Shape!' cried she.
`It is thine hour!'
In the evening, Lieutenant Governor Hutchinson
sat in the same chamber where the foregoing scene had
occurred, surrounded by several persons whose
various
interests had summoned them together. There
were the Selectmen of Boston, plain, patriarchal
fathers of the people, excellent representatives of the
old puritanical founders, whose sombre strength had
stamped so deep an impress upon the New England
character. Contrasting with these were one or two
members of Council, richly dressed in the white wigs,
the embroidered waistcoats and other magnificence of
the time, and making a somewhat ostentatious display
of courtier-like ceremonial. In attendance, likewise,
was a major of the British army, awaiting the
Lieutenant
Governor's orders for the landing of the troops,
which still remained on board the transports. The
Captain of Castle William stood beside Hutchinson's
chair, with folded arms, glancing rather haughtily at
the British officer, by whom he was soon to be
superseded
in his command. On a table, in the centre of
the chamber, stood a branched silver candlestick,
throwing down the glow of half a dozen wax lights
upon a paper apparently ready for the Lieutenant
Governor's signature.
Partly shrouded in the voluminous folds of one of
the window curtains, which fell from the ceiling to
the floor, was seen the white drapery of a lady's robe.
It may appear strange that Alice Vane should have
been there, at such a time; but there was something
so childlike, so wayward, in her singular character,
so apart from ordinary rules, that her presence did
not surprise the few who noticed it. Meantime, the
chairman of the Selectmen was addressing to the
Lieutenant Governor a long and solemn protest against
the reception of the British troops into the town.
`And if your Honor,' concluded this excellent, but
somewhat prosy old gentleman, `shall see fit to
persist
in bringing these mercenary sworders and
musketeers
into our quiet streets, not on our heads be the
responsibility. Think, sir, while there is yet time,
that if one drop of blood be shed, that blood shall be
an eternal stain upon your Honor's memory. You,
sir, have written, with an able pen, the deeds of our
forefathers. The more to be desired is it, therefore,
that yourself should deserve honorable mention, as a
true patriot and upright ruler, when your own doings
shall be written down in history.'
`I am not insensible, my good sir, to the natural
desire to stand well in the annals of my country,'
replied
Hutchinson, controlling his impatience into
courtesy, `nor know I any better method of attaining
that end than by withstanding the merely temporary
spirit of mischief, which, with your pardon, seems to
have infected elder men than myself. Would you
have me wait till the mob shall sack the Province
House, as they did my private mansion? Trust me,
sir, the time may come when you will be glad to flee
for protection to the King's banner, the raising of
which is now so distasteful to you.'
`Yes,' said the British major, who was impatiently
expecting the Lieutenant Governor's orders. `The
demagogues of this Province have raised the devil,
and cannot lay him again. We will exorcise him, in
God's name and the King's.'
`If you meddle with the devil, take care of his
claws!' answered the Captain of Castle William,
stirred by the taunt against his countrymen.
`Craving your pardon, young sir,' said the
venerable
Selectman, `let not an evil spirit enter into
your words. We will strive against the oppressor
with prayer and fasting, as our forefathers would
have done. Like them, moreover, we will submit
to whatever lot a wise Providence may send us,
always, after our own best exertions to amend it.'
`And there peep forth the devil's claws!'
muttered
Hutchinson, who well understood the nature of
Puritan submission. `This matter shall be expedited
forthwith. When there shall be a sentinel at every
corner, and a court of guard before the town-house,
a loyal gentleman may venture to walk abroad. What
to me is the outcry of a mob, in this remote province
of the realm? The King is my master, and England
is my country! Upheld by their armed strength, I
set my foot upon the rabble, and defy them!'
He snatched a pen, and was about to affix his
signature
to the paper that lay on the table, when the
Captain of Castle William placed his hand upon his
shoulder. The freedom of the action, so contrary
to the ceremonious respect which was then considered
due to rank and dignity, awakened general surprise,
and in none more than in the Lieutenant Governor
himself. Looking angrily up, he perceived that his
young relative was pointing his finger to the opposite
wall. Hutchinson's eye followed the signal; and he
saw, what had hitherto been unobserved, that a black
silk curtain was suspended before the mysterious
picture
,
so as completely to conceal it. His thoughts
immediately recurred to the scene of the preceding
afternoon; and, in his surprise, confused by indistinct
emotions, yet sensible that his niece must have had
an agency in this phenomenon, he called loudly upon
her.
`Alice!  Come hither, Alice!'
No sooner had he spoken than Alice Vane glided
from her station, and pressing one hand across her
eyes, with the other snatched away the sable curtain
that concealed the portrait. An exclamation of
surprise
burst from every beholder; but the Lieutenant
Governor's voice had a tone of horror.
`By heaven,' said he, in a low, inward murmur,
speaking rather to himself than to those around him,
`if the spirit of Edward Randolph were to appear
among us from the place of torment, he could not
wear more of the terrors of hell upon his face!'
`For some wise end,' said the aged Selectman,
solemnly
,
`hath Providence scattered away the mist of
years that had so long hid this dreadful effigy. Until
this hour no living man hath seen what we behold!'
Within the antique frame, which so recently had
enclosed a sable waste of canvas, now appeared a
visible picture, still dark, indeed, in its hues and
shadings
,
but thrown forward in strong relief. It was a
half-length figure of a gentleman in a rich, but very
old-fashioned dress of embroidered velvet, with a
broad ruff and a beard, and wearing a hat, the brim
of which overshadowed his forehead. Beneath this
cloud the eyes had a peculiar glare, which was
almost
life-like. The whole portrait started so
distinctly
out of the back-ground, that it had the effect of a
person looking down from the wall at the astonished
and awe-stricken spectators. The expression of the
face, if any words can convey an idea of it, was
that of a wretch detected in some hideous guilt, and
exposed to the bitter hatred, and laughter, and
withering
scorn, of a vast surrounding multitude. There
was the struggle of defiance, beaten down and
overwhelmed
by the crushing weight of ignominy. The
torture of the soul had come forth upon the
countenance
.
It seemed as if the picture, while hidden
behind
the cloud of immemorial years, had been all the
time acquiring an intenser depth and darkness of
expression
,
till now it gloomed forth again, and threw
its evil omen over the present hour. Such, if the
wild legend may be credited, was the portrait of
Edward
Randolph, as he appeared when a people's
curse had wrought its influence upon his nature.
`'Twould drive me mad  that awful face!' said
Hutchinson, who seemed fascinated by the
contemplation
of it.
`Be warned, then!' whispered Alice. `He
trampled
on a people's rights. Behold his punishment
and avoid a crime like his!'
The Lieutenant Governor actually trembled for an
instant; but, exerting his energy  which was not,
however, his most characteristic feature  he strove
to shake off the spell of Randolph's countenance.
`Girl!' cried he, laughing bitterly, as he turned to
Alice, `have you brought hither your painter's art
your Italian spirit of intrigue  your tricks of
stage-effect
and think to influence the councils of rulers
and the affairs of nations, by such shallow
contrivances
?
See here!'
`Stay yet awhile,' said the Selectman, as
Hutchinson
again snatched the pen; `for if ever mortal
man received a warning from a tormented soul, your
Honor is that man!'
`Away!' answered Hutchinson fiercely. `Though
yonder senseless picture cried "Forbear!"it
should not move me!'
Casting a scowl of defiance at the pictured face,
(which seemed, at that moment, to intensify the
horror
of its miserable and wicked look,) he scrawled
on the paper, in characters that betokened it a deed
of desperation, the name of Thomas Hutchinson.
Then, it is said, he shuddered, as if that signature
had granted away his salvation.
`It is done,' said he; and placed his hand upon
his brow.
`May Heaven forgive the deed,' said the soft, sal
accents of Alice Vane, like the voice of a good spirit
flitting away.
When morning came there was a stifled whisper
through the household, and spreading thence about
the town, that the dark, mysterious picture had started
from the wall, and spoken face to face with
Lieutenant
Governor Hutchinson. If such a miracle had
been wrought, however, no traces of it remained
behind
;
for within the antique frame, nothing could be
discerned, save the impenetrable cloud, which had
covered the canvas since the memory of man. If the
figure had, indeed, stepped forth, it had fled back,
spirit-like, at the day-dawn, and hidden itself behind
a century's obscurity. The truth probably was, that
Alice Vane's secret for restoring the hues of the
picture
had merely effected a temporary renovation.
But those who, in that brief interval, had beheld the
awful visage of Edward Randolph, desired no second
glance, and ever afterwards trembled at the
recollection
of the scene, as if an evil spirit had appeared
visibly among them. And as for Hutchinson, when,
far over the ocean, his dying hour drew on, he gasped
for breath, and complained that he was choking with
the blood of the Boston Massacre; and Francis
Lincoln
,
the former Captain of Castle William, who was
standing at his bedside, perceived a likeness in his
frenzied look to that of Edward Randolph. Did his
broken spirit feel, at that dread hour, the tremendous
burthen of a People's curse?
At the conclusion of this miraculous legend I
inquired
of mine host whether the picture still remained
in the chamber over our heads; but Mr. Tiffany
informed
me that it had long since been removed, and
was supposed to be hidden in some out-of-the-way
corner
of the New England Museum. Perchance some
curious
antiquary may light upon it there, and, with the
assistance of Mr. Howorth, the picture cleaner, may
supply a not unnecessary proof of the authenticity of
the facts here set down. During the progress of the
story a storm had been gathering abroad, and raging
and rattling so loudly in the upper regions of the
Province House, that it seemed as if all the old
Governors
and great men were running riot above stairs,
while Mr. Bela Tiffany babbled of them below. In
the course of generations, when many people have
lived and died in an ancient house, the whistling of
the wind through its crannies, and the creaking of its
beams and rafters, become strangely like the tones of
the human voice, or thundering laughter, or heavy
footsteps treading the deserted chambers. It is as if the
echoes of half a century were revived. Such were
the ghostly sounds that roared and murmured in our
ears, when I took leave of the circle round the
fireside
of the Province House, and plunging down the
door-steps, fought my way homeward against a
drifting
snow-storm.
NUMBER III.
LADY ELEANORE'S MANTLE.
Mine
excellent friend, the landlord of the Province
House, was pleased, the other evening, to invite Mr.
Tiffany and myself to an oyster supper. This slight
mark of respect and gratitude, as he handsomely
observed
,
was far less than the ingenious tale-teller, and
I, the humble note-taker of his narratives, had fairly
earned, by the public notice which our joint
lucubrations
had attracted to his establishment. Many a
segar
had been smoked within his premises  many a
glass of wine, or more potent aqua vit, had been
quaffed  many a dinner had been eaten by curious
strangers, who, save for the fortunate conjunction of
Mr. Tiffany and me, would never have ventured
through that darksome avenue, which gives access to
the historic precincts of the Province House. In
short, if any credit be due to the courteous
assurances
of Mr. Thomas Waite, we had brought his
forgotten
mansion almost as effectually into public view
as if we had thrown down the vulgar range of
shoe-shops
and dry-good stores, which hides its aristocratic
front from Washington street. It may be
unadvisable
,
however, to speak too loudly of the increased
custom of the house, lest Mr. Waite should find it
difficult to renew the lease on so favorable terms as
heretofore.
Being thus welcomed as benefactors, neither Mr.
Tiffany nor myself felt any scruple in doing full
justice
to the good things that were set before us. If
the feast were less magnificent than those same
paneled
walls had witnessed, in a by-gone century  if
mine host presided with somewhat less of state, than
might have befitted a successor of the royal
Governors
if the guests made a less imposing show than
the bewigged, and powdered, and embroidered
dignitaries
,
who erst banqueted at the gubernatorial table,
and now sleep within their armorial tombs on Copp's
Hill, or round King's Chapel  yet never, I may
boldly say, did a more comfortable little party
assemble
in the Province House, from Queen Anne's days
to the Revolution. The occasion was rendered more
interesting by the presence of a venerable personage,
whose own actual reminiscences went back to the epoch
of Gage and Howe, and even supplied him with a
doubtful anecdote or two of Hutchinson. He was
one of that small, and now all but extinguished class,
whose attachment to royalty, and to the colonial
institutions
and customs that were connected with it,
had never yielded to the democratic heresies of
aftertimes
.
The young queen of Britain has not a more
VOL. II. 4
loyal subject in her realm  perhaps not one who
would kneel before her throne with such reverential
love  as this old grandsire whose head has whitened
beneath the mild sway of the Republic, which still,
in his mellower moments, he terms a usurpation.
Yet prejudices so obstinate have not made him
an ungentle or impracticable companion. If the
truth must be told, the life of the aged loyalist has
been of such a scrambling and unsettled
character
he has had so little choice of friends, and been
so often destitute of any  that I doubt whether he
would refuse a cup of kindness with either Oliver
Cromwell or John Hancock; to say nothing of any
democrat now upon the stage. In another paper of
this series, I may perhaps give the reader a closer
glimpse of his portrait.
Our host, in due season, uncorked a bottle of
Madeira
,
of such exquisite perfume and admirable flavor,
that he surely must have discovered it in an ancient
bin, down deep beneath the deepest cellar, where
some jolly old butler stored away the Governor's
choicest wine, and forgot to reveal the secret on his
death-bed. Peace to his red-nosed ghost, and a
libation
to his memory! This precious liquor was
imbibed
by Mr. Tiffany with peculiar zest; and after
sipping the third glass, it was his pleasure to give us
one of the oddest legends which he had yet raked
from the store-house, where he keeps such matters.
With some suitable adornments from my own fancy,
it ran pretty much as follows:
Not long after Colonel Shute had assumed the
government
of Massachusetts Bay, now nearly a
hundred
and twenty years ago, a young lady of rank and
fortune arrived from England, to claim his protection
as her guardian. He was her distant relative, but the
nearest who had survived the gradual extinction of
her family; so that no more eligible shelter could be
found for the rich and high-born Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe, than within the Province House of a
transatlantic
colony. The consort of Governor Shute,
moreover, had been as a mother to her childhood, and
was now anxious to receive her, in the hope that a
beautiful young woman would be exposed to infinitely
less peril from the primitive society of New England,
than amid the artifices and corruptions of a court.
If either the Governor or his lady had especially
consulted their own comfort, they would probably
have sought to devolve the responsibility on other
hands; since with some noble and splendid traits of
character, Lady Eleanore was remarkable for a harsh,
unyielding pride, a haughty consciousness of her
hereditary
and personal advantages, which made her
almost incapable of control. Judging from many
traditionary anecdotes, this peculiar temper was hardly
less than a monomania; or, if the acts which it
inspired
were those of a sane person, it seemed due
from Providence that pride so sinful should be
followed
by as severe a retribution. That tinge of the
marvelous which is thrown over so many of these
half-forgotten legends has probably imparted an
additional
wildness to the strange story of Lady
Eleanore
Rochcliffe.
The ship in which she came passenger had arrived
at Newport, whence Lady Eleanore was conveyed to
Boston in the Governor's coach, attended by a small
escort of gentlemen on horseback. The ponderous
equipage, with its four black horses, attracted much
notice as it rumbled through Cornhill, surrounded by
the prancing steeds of half a dozen cavaliers, with
swords dangling to their stirrups and pistols at their
holsters. Through the large glass windows of the
coach, as it rolled along, the people could discern the
figure of Lady Eleanore, strangely combining an
almost queenly stateliness with the grace and beauty
of a maiden in her teens. A singular tale had gone
abroad among the ladies of the province, that their
fair rival was indebted for much of the irresistible
charm of her appearance to a certain article of dress
an embroidered mantle  which had been wrought
by the most skilful artist in London, and possessed
even magical properties of adornment. On the
present
occasion, however, she owed nothing to the
witchery
of dress, being clad in a riding-habit of velvet,
which would have appeared stiff and ungraceful on
any other form.
The coachman reined in his four black steeds, and
the whole cavalcade came to a pause in front of the
contorted iron balustrade that fenced the Province
House from the public street. It was an awkward
coincidence, that the bell of the Old South was just
then tolling for a funeral; so that, instead of a
gladsome
peal with which it was customary to announce
the arrival of distinguished strangers, Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe was ushered by a doleful clang, as if
calamity had come embodied in her beautiful person.
`A very great disrespect!' exclaimed Captain
Langford
,
an English officer, who had recently brought
despatches to Governor Shute. `The funeral should
have been deferred, lest Lady Eleanore's spirits be
affected by such a dismal welcome.'
`With your pardon, sir,' replied Doctor Clarke, a
physician, and a famous champion of the popular
party, `whatever the heralds may pretend, a dead
beggar must have precedence of a living queen.
King Death confers high privileges.'
These remarks were interchanged while the
speakers
waited a passage through the crowd, which had
gathered on each side of the gateway, leaving an
open avenue to the portal of the Province House.
A black slave in livery now leaped from behind the
coach, and threw open the door; while at the same
moment Governor Shute descended the flight of steps
from his mansion, to assist Lady Eleanore in
alighting
.
But the Governor's stately approach was
anticipated
in a manner that excited general astonishment.
A pale young man, with his black hair all in
disorder
,
rushed from the throng, and prostrated himself
beside the coach, thus offering his person as a
footstool
for Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe to tread upon.
She held back an instant; yet with an expression as
if doubting whether the young man were worthy to
bear the weight of her footstep, rather than
dissatisfied
to receive such awful reverence from a
fellow-mortal
.
`Up, sir,' said the Governor, sternly, at the same
time lifting his cane over the intruder. `What means
the Bedlamite by this freak?'
`Nay,' answered Lady Eleanore playfully, but
with more scorn than pity in her tone, `your
Excellency
shall not strike him. When men seek only to
be trampled upon, it were a pity to deny them a
favor so easily granted  and so well deserved!'
Then, though as lightly as a sunbeam on a cloud,
she placed her foot upon the cowering form, and
extended
her hand to meet that of the Governor.
There was a brief interval, during which Lady
Eleanore
retained this attitude; and never, surely, was
there an apter emblem of aristocracy and hereditary
pride, trampling on human sympathies and the
kindred
of nature, than these two figures presented at
that moment. Yet the spectators were so smitten
with her beauty, and so essential did pride seem to
the existence of such a creature, that they gave a
simultaneous acclamation of applause.
`Who is this insolent young fellow?' inquired
Captain Langford, who still remained beside Doctor
Clarke. `If he be in his senses, his impertinence
demands
the bastinado. If mad, Lady Eleanore should
be secured from further inconvenience, by his
confinement
.'
`His name is Jervase Helwyse,' answered the
Doctor
`a youth of no birth or fortune, or other
advantages
,
save the mind and soul that nature gave him;
and being secretary to our colonial agent in London,
it was his misfortune to meet this Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe. He loved her  and her scorn has driven
him mad.'
`He was mad so to aspire,' observed the English
officer.
`It may be so,' said Doctor Clarke, frowning as he
spoke. `But I tell you, sir, I could well nigh doute
the justice of the Heaven above us, if no signal
humiliation overtake this lady, who now treads so
haughtily into yonder mansion. She seeks to place
herself above the sympathies of our common nature,
which envelopes all human souls. See, if that nature
do not assert its claim over her in some mode that
shall bring her level with the lowest!'
`Never!' cried Captain Langford, indignantly
`neither in life nor when they lay her with her
ancestors
.'
Not many days afterwards the Governor gave:
ball in honor of Lady Eleanore Rochcliffe. The
principal gentry of the colony received invitations,
which were distributed to their residences, far and
near, by messengers on horseback, bearing missives
sealed with all the formality of official despatches.
In obedience to the summons, there was a general
gathering of rank, wealth, and beauty; and the wide
door of the Province House had seldom given
admittance
to more numerous and honorable guests than
on the evening of Lady Eleanore's ball. Without
much extravagance of eulogy, the spectacle might
even be termed splendid; for, according to the
fashion
of the times, the ladies shone in rich silks and
satins, outspread over wide-projecting hoops; and the
gentlemen glittered in gold embroidery, laid
unsparingly
upon the purple, or scarlet, or sky-blue velvet,
which was the material of their coats and waistcoats.
The latter article of dress was of great importance,
since it enveloped the wearer's body nearly to the
knees, and was perhaps bedizened with the amount
of his whole year's income, in golden flowers and
foliage. The altered taste of the present day  a
taste symbolic of a deep change in the whole system
of society  would look upon almost any of those
gorgeous figures as ridiculous; although that evening
the guests sought their reflections in the pier-glasses,
and rejoiced to catch their own glitter amid the
glittering
crowd. What a pity that one of the stately
mirrors has not preserved a picture of the scene,
which, by the very traits that were so transitory,
might have taught us much that would be worth
knowing and remembering!
Would, at least, that either painter or mirror could
convey to us some faint idea of a garment, already
noticed in this legend  the Lady Eleanore's
embroidered
mantle  which the gossips whispered was
invested
with magic properties, so as to lend a new and
untried grace to her figure each time that she put it
on! Idle fancy as it is, this mysterious mantle has
thrown an awe around my image of her, partly from
its fabled virtues, and partly because it was the
handiwork
of a dying woman, and, perchance, owed the
fantastic grace of its conception to the delirium of
approaching
death.
After the ceremonial greetings had been paid, Lady
Eleanore Rochcliffe stood apart from the mob of guests,
insulating herself within a small and distinguished
circle, to whom she accorded a more cordial favor
than to the general throng. The waxen torches threw
their radiance vividly over the scene, bringing out its
brilliant points in strong relief; but she gazed
carelessly
,
and with now and then an expression of
weariness
or scorn, tempered with such feminine grace,
that her auditors scarcely perceived the moral
deformity
of which it was the utterance. She beheld the
spectacle not with vulgar ridicule, as disdaining to be
pleased with the provincial mockery of a court festival,
but with the deeper scorn of one whose spirit held
itself too high to participate in the enjoyment of other
human souls. Whether or no the recollections of
those who saw her that evening were influenced by
the strange events with which she was subsequently
connected, so it was, that her figure ever after
recurred
to them as marked by something wild and
unnatural
;
although, at the time, the general whisper
was of her exceeding beauty, and of the
indescribable
charm which her mantle threw around her. Some
close observers, indeed, detected a feverish flush and
alternate paleness of countenance, with a
corresponding
flow and revulsion of spirits, and once or twice
a painful and helpless betrayal of lassitude, as if she
were on the point of sinking to the ground. Then,
with a nervous shudder, she seemed to arouse her
energies, and threw some bright and playful, yet
half-wicked
sarcasm into the conversation. There was so
strange a characteristic in her manners and
sentiments
,
that it astonished every right-minded listener;
till looking in her face, a lurking and incomprehensible
glance and smile perplexed them with doubts both as
to her seriousness and sanity. Gradually, Lady
Eleanore Rochcliffe's circle grew smaller, till only
four gentlemen remained in it. These were Captain
Langford, the English officer before mentioned; a
Virginian planter, who had come to Massachusetts on
some political errand; a young Episcopal clergyman,
the grandson of a British Earl; and lastly, the private
secretary of Governor Shute, whose obsequiousness
had won a sort of tolerance from Lady Eleanore.
At different periods of the evening the liveried
servants of the Province House passed among the
guests, bearing huge trays of refreshments, and
French and Spanish wines. Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe
,
who refused to wet her beautiful lips even with
a bubble of Champaigne, had sunk back into a large
damask chair, apparently overwearied either with the
excitement of the scene or its tedium; and while, for
an instant, she was unconscious of voices, laughter,
and music, a young man stole forward, and knelt
down at her feet. He bore a salver in his hand, on
which was a chased silver goblet, filled to the brim
with wine, which he offered as reverentially as to a
crowned queen, or rather with the awful devotion of
a priest doing sacrifice to his idol. Conscious that
some one touched her robe, Lady Eleanore started,
and unclosed her eyes upon the pale, wild features
and disheveled hair of Jervase Helwyse.
`Why do you haunt me thus?' said she, in a
languid
tone, but with a kindlier feeling than she
ordinarily
permitted herself to express. `They tell me that
I have done you harm.'
`Heaven knows if that be so,' replied the young
man solemnly. `But, Lady Eleanore, in requital of
that harm, if such there be, and for your own earthly
and heavenly welfare, I pray you to take one sip of
this holy wine, and then to pass the goblet round
among the guests. And this shall be a symbol that
you have not sought to withdraw yourself from the
chain of human sympathies  which whoso would
shake off must keep company with fallen angels.'
`Where has this mad fellow stolen that sacramental
vessel?' exclaimed the Episcopal clergyman.
This question drew the notice of the guests to the
silver cup, which was recognised as appertaining to
the communion plate of the Old South Church; and,
for aught that could be known, it was brimming over
with the consecrated wine.
`Perhaps it is poisoned,' half whispered the
Governor's
secretary.
`Pour it down the villain's throat!' cried the
Virginian
,
fiercely.
`Turn him out of the house!' cried Captain
Langford
,
seizing Jervase Helwyse so roughly by the
shoulder that the sacramental cup was overturned,
and its contents sprinkled upon Lady Eleanore's
mantle
.
`Whether knave, fool, or Bedlamite, it is
intolerable
that the fellow should go at large.'
`Pray, gentlemen, do my poor admirer no harm,' said
Lady Eleanore, with a faint and weary smile. `Take
him out of my sight, if such be your pleasure; for I
can find in my heart to do nothing but laugh at
him  whereas, in all decency and conscience, it
would become me to weep for the mischief I have
wrought!'
But while the bystanders were attempting to lead
away the unfortunate young man, he broke from
them, and with a wild, impassioned earnestness,
offered a new and equally strange petition to Lady
Eleanore. It was no other than that she should
throw off the mantle, which, while he pressed the
silver cup of wine upon her, she had drawn more
closely around her form, so almost to shroud herself
within it.
`Cast it from you!' exclaimed Jervase Helwyse,
clasping his hands in an agony of entreaty. `It may
not yet be too late! Give the accursed garment to
the flames!'
But Lady Eleanore, with a laugh of scorn, drew
the rich folds of the embroidered mantle over her
head, in such a fashion as to give a completely new
aspect to her beautiful face, which  half-hidden,
half-revealed  seemed to belong to some being of
mysterious character and purposes.
`Farewell, Jervase Helwyse!' said she. `Keep
my image in your remembrance, as you behold it
now.'
`Alas, lady!' he replied, in a tone no longer wild,
but sad as a funeral bell. `We must meet shortly,
when your face may wear another aspect  and that
shall be the image that must abide within me.'
He made no more resistance to the violent efforts
of the gentlemen and servants, who almost dragged
him out of the apartment, and dismissed him roughly
from the iron gate of the Province House. Captain
Langford, who had been very active in this affair,
was returning to the presence of Lady Eleanore
Rochcliffe, when he encountered the physician,
Doctor
Clarke, with whom he had held some casual talk
on the day of her arrival. The Doctor stood apart,
separated from Lady Eleanore by the width of the
room, but eyeing her with such keen sagacity, that
Captain Langford involuntarily gave him credit for
the discovery of some deep secret.
`You appear to be smitten, after all, with the
charms of this queenly maiden,' said he, hoping thus
to draw forth the physician's hidden knowledge.
`God forbid!' answered Doctor Clarke, with a
grave smile; `and if you be wise you will put up the
same prayer for yourself. Wo to those who shall be
smitten by this beautiful Lady Eleanore! But
yonder
stands the Governor  and I have a word or two
for his private ear. Good night!'
He accordingly advanced to Governor Shute, and
addressed him in so low a tone that none of the
bystanders
could catch a word of what he said; although
the sudden change of his Excellency's hitherto
cheerful
visage betokened that the communication could be
of no agreeable import. A very few moments
afterwards
,
it was announced to the guests that an
unforeseen
circumstance rendered it necessary to put a
premature close to the festival.
The ball at the Province House supplied a topic of
conversation for the colonial metropolis, for some
days after its occurrence, and might still longer have
been the general theme, only that a subject of all
engrossing
interest thrust it, for a time, from the public
recollection. This was the appearance of a dreadful
epidemic, which, in that age, and long before and
afterwards, was wont to slay its hundreds and
thousands
,
on both sides of the Atlantic. On the
occasion
of which we speak, it was distinguished by a
peculiar virulence, insomuch that it has left its traces
its pitmarks, to use an appropriate figure  on the
history of the country, the affairs of which were
thrown into confusion by its ravages. At first, unlike
its ordinary course, the disease seemed to confine
itself to the higher circles of society, selecting its
victims from among the proud, the well-born and the
wealthy, entering unabashed into stately chambers,
and lying down with the slumberers in silken beds.
Some of the most distinguished guests of the Province
House  even those whom the haughty Lady
Eleanore
Rochcliffe had deemed not unworthy of her
favor  were stricken by this fatal scourge. It was
noticed, with an ungenerous bitterness of feeling,
that the four gentlemen  the Virginian, the British
officer, the young clergyman, and the Governor's
secretary  who had been her most devoted
attendants
on the evening of the ball, were the foremost on
whom the plague-stroke fell. But the disease,
pursuing
its onward progress, soon ceased to be exclusively
a prerogative of aristocracy. Its red brand was no
longer conferred like a noble's star, or an order of
knighthood. It threaded its way through the narrow
and crooked streets, and entered the low, mean,
darksome
dwellings, and laid its hand of death upon the
artisans and laboring classes of the town. It
compelled
rich and poor to feel themselves brethren,
then; and stalking to and fro across the Three Hills,
with a fierceness which made it almost a new
pestilence
,
there was that mighty conqueror  that scourge
and horror of our forefathers  the Small Pox!
We cannot estimate the affright which this plague
inspired of yore, by contemplating it as the fangless
monster of the present day. We must remember,
rather, with what awe we watched the gigantic
footsteps
of the Asiatic cholera, striding from shore to
shore of the Atlantic, and marching like destiny upon
cities far remote, which flight had already half
depopulated
.
There is no other fear so horrible and
unhumanizing, as that which makes man dread to
breathe Heaven's vital air, lest it be poison, or to
grasp the hand of a brother or friend, lest the gripe
of the pestilence should clutch him. Such was the
dismay that now followed in the track of the disease,
or ran before it throughout the town. Graves were
hastily dug, and the pestilential relics, as hastily
covered
,
because the dead were enemies of the living,
and strove to draw them headlong, as it were, into
their own dismal pit. The public councils were
suspended
,
as if mortal wisdom might relinquish its
devices
,
now that an unearthly usurper had found his
way into the ruler's mansion. Had an enemy's fleet
been hovering on the coast, or his armies trampling
on our soil, the people would probably have
committed
their defence to that same direful conqueror, who
had wrought their own calamity, and would permit
no interference with his sway. This conqueror had
a symbol of his triumphs. It was a blood-red flag,
that fluttered in the tainted air, over the door of every
dwelling into which the Small Pox had entered.
Such a banner was long since waving over the
portal of the Province House; for thence, as was
proved by tracking its footsteps back, had all this
dreadful
mischief issued. It had been traced back to a lady's
luxurious chamber  to the proudest of the proud
to her that was so delicate, and hardly owned herself
of earthly mould  to the haughty one, who took her
stand above human sympathies  to Lady Eleanore!
There remained no room for doubt, that the contagion
had lurked in that gorgeous mantle, which threw so
strange a grace around her at the festival. Its
fantastic
splendor had been conceived in the delirious
brain of a woman on her death-bed, and was the last
toil of her stiffening fingers, which had interwoven
fate and misery with its golden threads. This dark
tale, whispered at first, was now bruited far and wide.
The people raved against the Lady Eleanore, and
cried out that her pride and scorn had evoked a fiend,
and that, between them both, this monstrous evil had
been born. At times, their rage and despair took the
semblance of grinning mirth; and whenever the red
flag of the pestilence was hoisted over another, and
yet another door, they clapt their hands and shouted
through the streets, in bitter mockery: `Behold a
new triumph for the Lady Eleanore!'
One day in the midst of these dismal times, a wild
figure approached the portal of the Province House,
and folding his arms, stood contemplating the scarlet
banner, which a passing breeze shook fitfully, as if to
fling abroad the contagion that it typified. At length,
climbing one of the pillars by means of the iron
balustrade
,
he took down the flag, and entered the
mansion
,
waving it above his head. At the foot of the
staircase he met the Governor, booted and spurred,
with his cloak drawn around him, evidently on the
point of setting forth upon a journey.
`Wretched lunatic, what do you seek here?'
exclaimed
Shute, extending his cane to guard himself
from contact. `There is nothing here but Death.
Back  or you will meet him!'
`Death will not touch me, the banner-bearer of the
pestilence!' cried Jervase Helwyse, shaking the red
flag aloft. `Death, and the Pestilence, who wears
the aspect of the Lady Eleanore, will walk through
the streets to-night, and I must march before them
with this banner!'
`Why do I waste words on the fellow?' muttered
the Governor, drawing his cloak across his mouth.
`What matters his miserable life, when none of us
are sure of twelve hours' breath? On, fool, to your
own destruction!'
He made way for Jervase Helwyse, who
immediately
ascended the staircase, but, on the first
landing-place
,
was arrested by the firm grasp of a hand upon
VOL. II. 5
his shoulder. Looking fiercely up, with a madman's
impulse to struggle with, and rend asunder his
opponent
,
he found himself powerless beneath a calm,
stern eye, which possessed the mysterious property
of quelling frenzy at its height. The person whom
he had now encountered was the physician, Doctor
Clarke, the duties of whose sad profession had led
him to the Province House, where he was an
infrequent
guest in more prosperous times.
`Young man, what is your purpose?'
demanded
he.
`I seek the Lady Eleanore,' answered Jervase
Helwyse, submissively.
`All have fled from her,' said the physician. `Why
do you seek her now? I tell you, youth, her nurse
fell death-stricken on the threshold of that fatal
chamber
.
Know ye not, that never came such a curse to
our shores as this lovely Lady Eleanore?  that her
breath has filled the air with poison?  that she has
shaken pestilence and death upon the land, from the
folds of her accursed mantle?'
`Let me look upon her!' rejoined the mad youth,
more wildly. `Let me behold her, in her awful
beauty, clad in the regal garments of the pestilence!
She and Death sit on a throne together. Let me
kneel down before them!'
`Poor youth!' said Doctor Clarke; and, moved
by a deep sense of human weakness, a smile of
caustic humor curled his lip even then. `Wilt thou
still worship the destroyer, and surround her image
with fantasies the more magnificent, the more evil
she has wrought? Thus man doth ever to his tyrants!
Approach, then! Madness, as I have noted, has that
good efficacy, that it will guard you from contagion
and perchance its own cure may be found in
yonder
chamber.'
Ascending another flight of stairs, he threw open
a door, and signed to Jervase Helwyse that he should
enter. The poor lunatic, it seems probable, had
cherished a delusion that his haughty mistress sat in
state, unharmed herself by the pestilential influence,
which, as by enchantment, she scattered round about
her. He dreamed, no doubt, that her beauty was
not dimmed, but brightened into superhuman
splendor
.
With such anticipations, he stole reverentially
to the door at which the physician stood, but paused
upon the threshold, gazing fearfully into the gloom
of the darkened chamber.
`Where is the Lady Eleanore?' whispered he.
`Call her,' replied the physician.
`Lady Eleanore!  Princess!  Queen of Death!'
cried Jervase Helwyse, advancing three steps into the
chamber. `She is not here! There, on yonder table,
I behold the sparkle of a diamond which once she
wore upon her bosom. There'  and he shuddered
`there hangs her mantle, on which a dead woman
embroidered a spell of dreadful potency. But where
is the Lady Eleanore!'
Something stirred within the silken curtains of a
canopied bed; and a low moan was uttered, which,
listening intently, Jervase Helwyse began to
distinguish
as a woman's voice, complaining dolefully of
thirst. He fancied, even, that he recognised its
tones.
`My throat!  my throat is scorched,' murmured
the voice. `A drop of water!'
`What thing art thou?' said the brain-stricken
youth, drawing near the bed and tearing asunder its
curtains. `Whose voice hast thou stolen for thy
murmurs
and miserable petitions, as if Lady Eleanore
could be conscious of mortal infirmity? Fie! Heap
of diseased mortality, why lurkest thou in my lady's
chamber?'
`Oh, Jervase Helwyse,' said the voice  and as it
spoke, the figure contorted itself, struggling to hide its
blasted face  `look not now on the woman you once
loved! The curse of Heaven hath stricken me,
because
I would not call man my brother, nor woman
sister. I wrapt myself in PRIDE as in a MANTLE, and
scorned the sympathies of nature; and therefore has
nature made this wretched body the medium of a
dreadful sympathy. You are avenged  they are
all avenged  Nature is avenged  for I am
Eleanore
Rochcliffe!'
The malice of his mental disease, the bitterness
lurking at the bottom of his heart, mad as he was, for
a blighted and ruined life, and love that had been
paid with cruel scorn, awoke within the breast of
Jervase
Helwyse. He shook his finger at the wretched
girl, and the chamber echoed, the curtains of the bed
were shaken, with his outburst of insane merriment.
`Another triumph for the Lady Eleanore!' he
cried. `All have been her victims! Who so worthy
to be the final victim as herself?'
Impelled by some new fantasy of his crazed
intellect
,
he snatched the fatal mantle, and rushed from
the chamber and the house. That night, a
procession
passed, by torch light, through the streets,
bearing
in the midst, the figure of a woman, enveloped
with a richly embroidered mantle; while in advance
stalked Jervase Helwyse, waving the red flag of the
pestilence. Arriving opposite the Province House,
the mob burned the effigy, and a strong wind came
and swept away the ashes. It was said, that, from
that very hour, the pestilence abated, as if its sway
had some mysterious connection, from the first
plague-stroke to the last, with Lady Eleanore's
Mantle
.
A remarkable uncertainty broods over that
unhappy
lady's fate. There is a belief, however, that,
in a certain chamber of this mansion, a female form
may sometimes be duskily discerned, shrinking into
the darkest corner, and muffling her face within an
embroidered mantle. Supposing the legend true, can
this be other than the once proud Lady Eleanore?
Mine host, and the old loyalist, and I, bestowed no
little warmth of applause upon this narrative, in
which we had all been deeply interested; for the
reader can scarcely conceive how unspeakably the
effect of such a tale is heightened, when, as in the
present case, we may repose perfect confidence in
the veracity of him who tells it. For my own part,
knowing how scrupulous is Mr. Tiffany to settle the
foundation of his facts, I could not have believed him
one whit the more faithfully, had he professed
himself
an eye-witness of the doings and sufferings of
poor Lady Eleanore. Some skeptics, it is true,
might demand documentary evidence, or even require
him to produce the embroidered mantle, forgetting that
Heaven be praised  it was consumed to ashes.
But now the old loyalist, whose blood was warmed
by the good cheer, began to talk, in his turn, about
the traditions of the Province House, and hinted that
he, if it were agreeable, might add a few
reminiscences
to our legendary stock. Mr. Tiffany, having
no cause to dread a rival, immediately besought him
to favor us with a specimen; my own entreaties, of
course, were urged to the same effect; and our
venerable
guest, well pleased to find willing auditors,
awaited only the return of Mr. Thomas Waite, who
had been summoned forth to provide accommodations
for several new arrivals. Perchance the public
but be this as its own caprice and ours shall settle the
matter  may read the result in another Tale of the
Province House.
NUMBER IV.
OLD ESTHER DUDLEY.
Our
host having resumed the chair, he, as well as
Mr. Tiffany and myself, expressed much eagerness
to be made acquainted with the story to which the
loyalist had alluded. That venerable man first of
all saw fit to moisten his throat with another glass of
wine, and then, turning his face towards our coal fire,
looked steadfastly for a few moments into the depths
of its cheerful glow. Finally, he poured forth a great
fluency of speech. The generous liquid that he had
imbibed, while it warmed his age-chilled blood,
likewise
took off the chill from his heart and mind, and
gave him an energy to think and feel, which we
could hardly have expected to find beneath the snows
of fourscore winters. His feelings, indeed, appeared
to me more excitable than those of a younger man;
or, at least, the same degree of feeling manifested
itself by more visible effects, than if his judgment
and will had possessed the potency of meridian life.
At the pathetic passages of his narrative, he readily
melted into tears. When a breath of indignation
swept across his spirit, the blood flushed his withered
visage even to the roots of his white hair; and he
shook his clenched fist at the trio of peaceful
auditors
,
seeming to fancy enemies in those who felt very
kindly towards the desolate old soul. But ever and
anon, sometimes in the midst of his most earnest talk,
this ancient person's intellect would wander vaguely,
losing its hold of the matter in hand, and groping for
it amid misty shadows. Then would he cackle forth
a feeble laugh, and express a doubt whether his wits
for by that phrase it pleased our ancient friend to
signify his mental powers  were not getting a little
the worse for wear.
Under these disadvantages, the old loyalist's story
required more revision to render it fit for the public
eye, than those of the series which have preceded it;
nor should it be concealed, that the sentiment and
tone of the affair may have undergone some slight, or
perchance more than slight metamorphosis, in its
transmission to the reader through the medium of a
thorough-going democrat. The tale itself is a mere
sketch, with no involution of plot, nor any great
interest
of events, yet possessing, if I have rehearsed it
aright, that pensive influence over the mind, which
the shadow of the old Province House flings upon the
loiterer in its court-yard.
The hour had come  the hour of defeat and
humiliation
when Sir William Howe was to pass over
the threshold of the Province House, and embark, with
no such triumphal ceremonies as he once promised
himself, on board the British fleet. He bade his
servants
and military attendants go before him, and
lingered
a moment in the loneliness of the mansion, to
quell the fierce emotions that struggled in his bosom
as with a death-throb. Preferable, then, would he
have deemed his fate, had a warrior's death left him a
claim to the narrow territory of a grave, within the
soil which the King had given him to defend. With
an ominous perception that, as his departing footsteps
echoed adown the staircase, the sway of Britain was
passing forever from New England, he smote his
clenched hand on his brow, and cursed the destiny
that had flung the shame of a dismembered empire
upon him.
`Would to God,' cried he, hardly repressing his
tears of rage, `that the rebels were even now at the
door-step! A blood-stain upon the floor should then
bear testimony that the last British ruler was faithful
to his trust.'
The tremulous voice of a woman replied to his
exclamation.
`Heaven's cause and the King's are one,' it said.
`Go forth, Sir William Howe, and trust in Heaven to
bring back a Royal Governor in triumph.'
Subduing at once the passion to which he had
yielded only in the faith that it was unwitnessed, Sir
William Howe became conscious that an aged woman,
leaning on a gold-headed staff, was standing betwixt
him and the door. It was old Esther Dudley, who
had dwelt almost immemorial years in this mansion,
until her presence seemed as inseparable from it as
the recollections of its history. She was the
daughter
of an ancient and once eminent family, which had
fallen into poverty and decay, and left its last
descendant
no resource save the bounty of the King,
nor any shelter except within the walls of the
Province
House. An office in the household, with merely
nominal duties, had been assigned to her as a
pretext
for the payment of a small pension, the greater
part of which she expended in adorning herself with
an antique magnificence of attire. The claims of
Esther Dudley's gentle blood were acknowledged by
all the successive Governors; and they treated her
with the punctilious courtesy which it was her foible
to demand, not always with success, from a neglectful
world. The only actual share which she assumed in
the business of the mansion, was to glide through its
passages and public chambers, late at night, to see
that the servants had dropped no fire from their
flaring
torches, nor left embers crackling and blazing on
the hearths. Perhaps it was this invariable custom of
walking her rounds in the hush of midnight, that
caused the superstition of the times to invest the old
woman with attributes of awe and mystery; fabling
that she had entered the portal of the Province House,
none knew whence, in the train of the first Royal
Governor, and that it was her fate to dwell there till
the last should have departed. But Sir William Howe,
if he ever heard this legend, had forgotten it.
`Mistress Dudley, why are you loitering here?'
asked he, with some severity of tone. `It is my
pleasure to be the last in this mansion of the King.'
`Not so, if it please your Excellency,' answered
the time-stricken woman. `This roof has sheltered
me long. I will not pass from it until they bear me
to the tomb of my forefathers. What other shelter is
there for old Esther Dudley, save the Province House
or the grave?'
`Now Heaven forgive me!' said Sir William Howe
to himself. `I was about to leave this wretched old
creature to starve or beg. Take this, good Mistress
Dudley,' he added, putting a purse into her hands.
`King George's head on these golden guineas is
sterling yet, and will continue so, I warrant you, even
should the rebels crown John Hancock their king.
That purse will buy a better shelter than the Province
House can now afford.'
`While the burthen of life remains upon me, I will
have no other shelter than this roof,' persisted Esther
Dudley, striking her staff upon the floor, with a
gesture
that expressed immovable resolve. `And when
your Excellency returns in triumph, I will totter
into the porch to welcome you.'
`My poor old friend!' answered the British
General
,
and all his manly and martial pride could no
longer restrain a gush of bitter tears. `This is an evil
hour for you and me. The province which the King
entrusted to my charge is lost. I go hence in
misfortune
perchance in disgrace  to return no more.
And you, whose present being is incorporated with the
past  who have seen Governor after Governor, in
stately pageantry, ascend these steps  whose whole
life has been an observance of majestic ceremonies,
and a worship of the King  how will you endure
the change? Come with us! Bid farewell to a land
that has shaken off its allegiance, and live still under
a Royal government, at Halifax.'
`Never, never!' said the pertinacious old dame.
`Here will I abide; and King George shall still have
one true subject in his disloyal province.'
`Beshrew the old fool!' muttered Sir William
Howe, growing impatient of her obstinacy, and
ashamed of the emotion into which he had been
betrayed
.
`She is the very moral of old-fashioned
prejudice, and could exist nowhere but in this musty
edifice. Well, then, Mistress Dudley, since you will
needs tarry, I give the Province House in charge to
you. Take this key, and keep it safe until myself, or
some other Royal Governor, shall demand it of you.'
Smiling bitterly at himself and her, he took the
heavy key of the Province House, and delivering it
into the old lady's hands, drew his cloak around him
for departure. As the General glanced back at
Esther
Dudley's antique figure, he deemed her
well-fitted
for such a charge, as being so perfect a
representative
of the decayed past  of an age gone by,
with its manners, opinions, faith, and feelings, all
fallen into oblivion or scorn  of what had once
been a reality, but was now merely a vision of faded
magnificence. Then Sir William Howe strode forth,
smiting his clenched hands together, in the fierce
anguish
of his spirit; and old Esther Dudley was left
to keep watch in the lonely Province House, dwelling
there with memory:  and if Hope ever seemed to
flit around her, still it was Memory in disguise.
The total change of affairs that ensued on the
departure
of the British troops did not drive the
venerable
lady from her strong-hold. There was not, for
many years afterwards, a Governor of Massachusetts;
and the magistrates, who had charge of such matters,
saw no objection to Esther Dudley's residence in the
Province House, especially as they must otherwise
have paid a hireling for taking care of the premises,
which with her was a labor of love. And so they
left her the undisturbed mistress of the old historic
edifice. Many and strange were the fables which the
gossips whispered about her, in all the chimney-
corners
of the town. Among the time-worn articles of
furniture that had been left in the mansion, there was
a tall, antique mirror, which was well worthy of a
tale by itself, and perhaps may hereafter be the theme
of one. The gold of its heavily-wrought frame was
tarnished, and its surface so blurred, that the old
woman's figure, whenever she paused before it,
looked indistinct and ghostlike. But it was the general
belief that Esther could cause the Governors of the
overthrown dynasty, with the beautiful ladies who had
once adorned their festivals, the Indian chiefs who
had come up to the Province House to hold council or
swear allegiance, the grim Provincial warriors, the
severe clergymen  in short, all the pageantry of
gone days  all the figures that ever swept across the
broad plate of glass in former times  she could
cause the whole to reappear, and people the inner
world of the mirror with shadows of old life. Such
legends as these, together with the singularity of her
isolated existence, her age, and the infirmity that
each added winter flung upon her, made Mistress
Dudley the object both of fear and pity; and it was
partly the result of either sentiment, that, amid all the
angry license of the times, neither wrong nor insult
ever fell upon her unprotected head. Indeed, there
was so much haughtiness in her demeanor towards
intruders, among whom she reckoned all persons
acting
under the new authorities, that it was really an
affair of no small nerve to look her in the face. And
to do the people justice, stern republicans as they had
now become, they were well content that the old
gentlewoman
,
in her hoop-petticoat and faded embroidery,
should still haunt the palace of ruined pride and
overthrown
power, the symbol of a departed system,
embodying
a history in her person. So Esther Dudley
dwelt, year after year, in the Province House, still
reverencing all that others had flung aside, still
faithful
to her King, who, so long as the venerable dame
yet held her post, might be said to retain one true
subject in New England, and one spot of the empire
that had been wrested from him.
And did she dwell there in utter loneliness?
Rumor
said, not so. Whenever her chill and withered
VOL. II. 6
heart desired warmth, she was wont to summon a
black slave of Governor Shirley's from the blurred
mirror, and send him in search of guests who had
long ago been familiar in those deserted chambers.
Forth went the sable messenger, with the starlight or
the moonshine gleaming through him, and did his
errand in the burial-grounds, knocking at the iron
doors of tombs, or upon the marble slabs that covered
them, and whispering to those within: `My mistress,
old Esther Dudley, bids you to the Province House
at midnight.' And punctually as the clock of the
Old South told twelve, came the shadows of the
Olivers, the Hutchinsons, the Dudleys, all the
grandees
of a bygone generation, gliding beneath the
portal
into the well-known mansion, where Esther
mingled
with them as if she likewise were a shade.
Without vouching for the truth of such traditions, it is
certain that Mistress Dudley sometimes assembled a
few of the stanch, though crest-fallen old tories,
who had lingered in the rebel town during those days
of wrath and tribulation. Out of a cobwebbed bottle,
containing liquor that a Royal Governor might have
smacked his lips over, they quaffed healths to the
King, and babbled treason to the Republic, feeling as
if the protecting shadow of the throne were still flung
around them. But, draining the last drops of their
liquor, they stole timorously homeward, and
answered
not again, if the rude mob reviled them in the
street.
Yet Esther Dudley's most frequent and favored
guests were the children of the town. Towards them
she was never stern. A kindly and loving nature,
hindered elsewhere from its free course by a
thousand
rocky prejudices, lavished itself upon these little
ones. By bribes of gingerbread of her own making,
stamped with a royal crown, she tempted their sunny
sportiveness beneath the gloomy portal of the
Province
House, and would often beguile them to spend a
whole play-day there, sitting in a circle round the
verge of her hoop-petticoat, greedily attentive to her
stories of a dead world. And when these little boys
and girls stole forth again from the dark mysterious
mansion, they went bewildered, full of old feelings
that graver people had long ago forgotten, rubbing
their eyes at the world around them as if they had
gone astray into ancient times, and become children
of the past. At home, when their parents asked
where they had loitered such a weary while, and
with whom they had been at play, the children would
talk of all the departed worthies of the Province, as
far back as Governor Belcher, and the haughty dame
of Sir William Phips. It would seem as though they
had been sitting on the knees of these famous
personages
,
whom the grave had hidden for half a
century
,
and had toyed with the embroidery of their
rich waistcoats, or roguishly pulled the long curls of
their flowing wigs `But Governor Belcher has been
dead this many a year,' would the mother say to her
little boy. `And did you really see him at the
Province
House?' `Oh, yes, dear mother! yes!' the
half dreaming child would answer. `But when old
Esther had done speaking about him he faded away
out of his chair.' Thus, without affrighting her little
guests, she led them by the hand into the chambers
of her own desolate heart, and made childhood's fancy
discern the ghosts that haunted there.
Living so continually in her own circle of ideas,
and never regulating her mind by a proper reference
to present things, Esther Dudley appears to have
grown partially creazed. It was found that she had
no right sense of the progress and true state of the
Revolutionary war, but held a constant faith that the
armies of Britain were victorious on every field, and
destined to be ultimately triumphant. Whenever the
town rejoiced for a battle won by Washington, or
Gates, or Morgan, or Greene, the news, in passing
through the door of the Province House, as through
the ivory gate of dreams, became metamorphosed into
a strange tale of the prowess of Howe, Clinton, or
Cornwallis. Sooner or later; it was her invincible
belief, the colonies would be prostrate at the footstool
of the King. Sometimes she seemed to take for
granted that such was already the case. On one
occasion
,
she startled the town's people by a brilliant
illumination of the Province House, with candles at
every pane of glass, and a transparency of the King's
initials and a crown of light, in the great balcony
window. The figure of the aged woman, in the most
gorgeous of her mildewed velvets and brocades, was
seen passing from casement to casement, until she
paused before the balcony, and flourished a huge key
above her head. Her wrinkled visage actually
gleamed
with triumph, as if the soul within her were a
festal
lamp.
`What means this blaze of light? What does old
Esther's joy portend?' whispered a spectator. `It
is frightful to see her gliding about the chambers,
and rejoicing there without a soul to bear her
company
.'
`It is as if she were making merry in a tomb,'
said another.
`Pshaw! It is no such mystery,' observed an old
man, after some brief exercise of memory. `
Mistress
Dudley is keeping jubilee for the King of
England's
birth-day.'
Then the people laughed aloud, and would have
thrown mud against the blazing transparency of the
King's crown and initials, only that they pitied the
poor old dame, who was so dismally triumphant amid
the wreck and ruin of the system to which she
appertained
.
Oftentimes it was her custom to climb the weary
staircase that wound upward to the cupola, and thence
strain her dimmed eyesight seaward and countryward,
watching for a British fleet, or for the march of a
grand procession, with the King's banner floating over
it. The passengers in the street below would discern
her anxious visage, and send up a shout  `When
the golden Indian on the Province House shall shoot
his arrow, and when the cock on the Old South spire
shall crow, then look for a Royal Governor again!'
for this had grown a by-word through the town.
And at last, after long, long years, old Esther Dudley
knew, or perchance she only dreamed, that a Royal
Governor was on the eve of returning to the Province
House, to receive the heavy key which Sir William
Howe had committed to her charge. Now it was the
fact, that intelligence bearing some faint analogy to
Esther's version of it, was current among the town's
people. She set the mansion in the best order that
her means allowed, and arraying herself in silks and
tarnished gold, stood long before the blurred mirror to
admire her own magnificence. As she gazed, the
gray and withered lady moved her ashen lips,
murmuring
half aloud, talking to shapes that she saw
within the mirror, to shadows of her own fantasies,
to the household friends of memory, and bidding them
rejoice with her, and come forth to meet the Governor.
And while absorbed in this communion, Mistress
Dudley
heard the tramp of many footsteps in the street,
and looking out at the window, beheld what she
construed
as the Royal Governor's arrival.
`Oh, happy day! oh, blessed, blessed hour!' she
exclaimed. `Let me but bid him welcome within the
portal, and my task in the Province House, and on
earth, is done!'
Then with tottering feet, which age and tremulous
joy caused to tread amiss, she hurried down the grand
staircase, her silks sweeping and rustling as she went,
so that the sound was as if a train of spectral
courtiers
were thronging from the dim mirror. And
Esther
Dudley fancied, that as soon as the wide door
should be flung open, all the pomp and splendor of
by-gone times would pace majestically into the
Province
House, and the gilded tapestry of the past
would be brightened by the sunshine of the present.
She turned the key  withdrew it from the lock
unclosed the door  and stept across the threshold.
Advancing up the court-yard, appeared a person of
most dignified mien, with tokens, as Esther
interpreted
them, of gentle blood, high rank, and long
accustomed
authority, even in his walk and every gesture.
He was richly dressed, but wore a gouty shoe, which,
however, did not lessen the stateliness of his gait.
Around and behind him were people in plain civic
dresses, and two or three war-worn veterans, evidently
officers of rank, arrayed in a uniform of blue and
buff. But Esther Dudley, firm in the belief that had
fastened its roots about her heart, beheld only the
principal personage, and never doubted that this was
the long-looked-for Governor, to whom she was to
surrender up her charge. As he approached, she
involuntarily sank down on her knees, and tremblingly
held forth the heavy key.
`Receive my trust! take it quickly!' cried she;
`for methinks Death is striving to snatch away my
triumph. But he comes too late. Thank Heaven
for this blessed hour! God save King George!'
`That, Madam, is a strange prayer to be offered up
at such a moment,' replied the unknown guest of the
Province House, and couricously removing his hat, he
offered his arm to raise the aged woman. `Yet, in
reverence for your gray hairs and long-kept faith,
Heaven forbid that any here should say you nay.
Over the realms which still acknowledge his sceptre,
God save King George!'
Esther Dudley started to her feet, and hastily
clutching back the key, gazed with fearful
earnestness
at the stranger; and dimly and doubtfully, as if
suddenly awakened from a dream, her bewildered
eyes half recognised his face. Years ago, she had
known him among the gentry of the province. But
the ban of the King had fallen upon him! How,
then, came the doomed victim here? Proscribed,
excluded
from mercy, the monarch's most dreaded and
hated foe, this New England merchant had stood
triumphantly
against a kingdom's strength; and his foot
now trode upon humbled Royalty, as he ascended
the steps of the Province House, the people's chosen
Governor of Massachusetts.
`Wretch, wretch that I am!' muttered the old
woman, with such a heart-broken expression, that the
tears gushed from the stranger's eyes. `Have I
bidden a traitor welcome! Come, Death! come
quickly!'
`Alas, venerable lady!' said Governor Hancock,
lending her his support with all the reverence that a
courtier would have shown to a queen. `Your life
has been prolonged until the world has changed
around you. You have treasured up all that time
has rendered worthless  the principles, feelings,
manners, modes of being and acting, which another
generation has flung aside  and you are a symbol of
the past. And I, and these around me  we
represent
a new race of men  living no longer in the
past, scarcely in the present  but projecting our
lives forward into the future. Ceasing to model
ourselves
on ancestral superstitions, it is our faith and
principle to press onward, onward! Yet,' continued
he, turning to his attendants, `let us reverence, for
the last time, the stately and gorgeous prejudices of
the tottering Past!'
While the Republican Governor spoke, he had
continued
to support the helpless form of Esther
Dudley
;
her weight grew heavier against his arm; but
at last, with a sudden effort to free herself, the
ancient
woman sank down beside one of the pillars of
the portal. The key of the Province House fell from
her grasp, and clanked against the stone.
`I have been faithful unto death,' murmured she.
`God save the King!'
`She hath done her office!' said Hancock,
solemnly
.
`We will follow her reverently to the tomb
of her ancestors; and then, my fellow-citizens,
onward
onward! We are no longer children of the
Past!'
As the old loyalist concluded his narrative, the
enthusiasm
which had been fitfully flashing within his
sunken eyes, and quivering across his wrinkled
visage
,
faded away, as if all the lingering fire of his
soul were extinguished. Just then, too, a lamp upon
the mantelpiece threw out a dying gleam, which
vanished
as speedily as it shot upward, compelling our
eyes to grope for one another's features by the dim
glow of the hearth. With such a lingering fire,
methought
,
with such a dying gleam, had the glory of
the ancient system vanished from the Province House,
when the spirit of old Esther Dudley took its flight.
And now, again, the clock of the Old South threw its
voice of ages on the breeze, knolling the hourly knell
of the Past, crying out far and wide through the
multitudinous
city, and filling our ears, as we sat in the
dusky chamber, with its reverberating depth of tone.
In that same mansion  in that very chamber  what
a volume of history had been told off into hours, by
the same voice that was now trembling in the air.
Many a Governor had heard those midnight accents,
and longed to exchange his stately cares for slumber.
And as for mine host, and Mr. Bela Tiffany, and the
old loyalist, and me, we had babbled about dreams of
the past, until we almost fancied that the clock was
still striking in a by-gone century. Neither of us
would have wondered, had a hoop-petticoated
phantom
of Esther Dudley tottered into the chamber,
walking her rounds in the hush of midnight, as of
yore, and motioned us to quench the fading embers
of the fire, and leave the historic precincts to herself
and her kindred shades. But as no such vision was
vouchsafed, I retired unbidden, and would advise Mr.
Tiffany to lay hold of another auditor, being resolved
not to show my face in the Province House for a good
while hence  if ever.
THE HAUNTED MIND.
What
a singular moment is the first one, when you
have hardly begun to recollect yourself, after starting
from midnight slumber! By unclosing your eyes so
suddenly, you seem to have surprised the personages
of your dream in full convocation round your bed,
and catch one broad glance at them before they can
flit into obscurity. Or, to vary the metaphor, you find
yourself, for a single instant, wide awake in that realm
of illusions, whither sleep has been the passport, and
behold its ghostly inhabitants and wondrous scenery,
with a perception of their strangeness, such as you
never attain while the dream is undisturbed. The
distant sound of a church clock is borne faintly on the
wind. You question with yourself, half seriously,
whether it has stolen to your waking ear from some
gray tower, that stood within the precincts of your
dream. While yet in suspense, another clock flings its
heavy clang over the slumbering town, with so full and
distinct a sound, and such a long murmur in the
neighboring
air, that you are certain it must proceed from
the steeple at the nearest corner. You count the
strokes  one  two, and there they cease, with a
booming sound, like the gathering of a third stroke
within the bell.
If you could choose an hour of wakefulness out of
the whole night, it would be this. Since your sober
bedtime, at eleven, you have had rest enough to take
off the pressure of yesterday's fatigue; while before
you, till the sun comes from `far Cathay' to brighten
your window, there is almost the space of a summer
night; one hour to be spent in thought, with the
mind's eye half shut, and two in pleasant dreams,
and two in that strangest of enjoyments, the
forgetfulness
alike of joy and woe. The moment of rising
belongs to another period of time, and appears so
distant
,
that the plunge out of a warm bed into the frosty
air cannot yet be anticipated with dismay. Yesterday
has already vanished among the shadows of the past;
to-morrow has not yet emerged from the future.
You have found an intermediate space, where the
business of life does not intrude; where the passing
moment lingers, and becomes truly the present; a
spot where Father Time, when he thinks nobody is
watching him, sits down by the way side to take breath.
Oh, that he would fall asleep, and let mortals live on
without growing older!
Hitherto you have lain perfectly still, because the
slightest motion would dissipate the fragments of your
slumber. Now, being irrevocably awake, you peep
through the half drawn window curtain, and observe
that the glass is ornamented with fanciful devices in
frost work, and that each pane presents something
like a frozen dream. There will be time enough to
trace out the analogy, while waiting the summons to
breakfast. Seen through the clear portion of the glass,
where the silvery mountain peaks of the frost scenery
do not ascend, the most conspicuous object is the
steeple; the white spire of which directs you to the
wintry lustre of the firmament. You may almost
distinguish the figures on the clock that has just told
the hour. Such a frosty sky, and the snow-covered
roofs, and the long vista of the frozen street, all white,
and the distant water hardened into rock, might make
you shiver, even under four blankets and a woolen
comforter. Yet look at that one glorious star! Its
beams are distinguishable from all the rest, and
actually
cast the shadow of the casement on the bed, with
a radiance of deeper hue than moonlight, though not
so accurate an outline.
You sink down and muffle your head in the clothes,
shivering all the while, but less from bodily chill, than
the bare idea of a polar atmosphere. It is too cold
even for the thoughts to venture abroad. You
speculate
on the luxury of wearing out a whole existence
in bed, like an oyster in its shell, content with the
sluggish ecstasy of inaction, and drowsily conscious
of nothing but delicious warmth, such as you now
feel again. Ah! that idea has brought a hideous one
in its train. You think how the dead are lying in their
cold shrouds and narrow coffins, through the drear
winter of the grave, and cannot persuade your fancy
that they neither shrink nor shiver, when the snow is
drifting over their little hillocks, and the bitter blast
howls against the door of the tomb. That gloomy
thought will collect a gloomy multitude, and throw its
complexion over your wakeful hour.
In the depths of every heart, there is a tomb and a
dungeon, though the lights, the music, and revelry
above may cause us to forget their existence, and the
buried ones, or prisoners whom they hide. But
sometimes
,
and oftenest at midnight, those dark receptacles
are flung wide open. In an hour like this, when the
mind has a passive sensibility, but no active strength;
when the imagination is a mirror, imparting vividness
to all ideas, without the power of selecting or
controlling
them; then pray that your griefs may slumber,
and the brotherhood of remorse not break their chain.
It is too late! A funeral train comes gliding by your
bed, in which Passion and Feeling assume bodily
shape, and things of the mind become dim spectres
to the eye. There is your earliest Sorrow, a pale
young mourner, wearing a sister's likeness to first
love, sadly beautiful, with a hallowed sweetness in her
melancholy features, and grace in the flow of her
sable robe. Next appears a shade of ruined
loveliness
,
with dust among her golden hair, and her bright
garments all faded and defaced, stealing from your
glance with drooping head, as fearful of reproach;
she was your fondest Hope, but a delusive one; so
call her Disappointment now. A sterner form
succeeds
,
with a brow of wrinkles, a look and gesture of
VOL. II. 7
iron authority; there is no name for him unless it be
Fatality, an emblem of the evil influence that rules
your fortunes; a demon to whom you subjected
yourself
by some error at the outset of life, and were
bound his slave forever, by once obeying him. See!
those fiendish lineaments graven on the darkness, the
writhed lip of scorn, the mockery of that living eye,
the pointed finger, touching the sore place in your
heart! Do you remember any act of enormous folly,
at which you would blush, even in the remotest cavern
of the earth? Then recognise your Shame.
Pass, wretched band! Well for the wakeful one,
if, riotously miserable, a fiercer tribe do not surround
him, the devils of a guilty heart, that holds its hell
within itself. What if Remorse should assume the
features of an injured friend? What if the fiend
should come in woman's garments, with a pale beauty
amid sin and desolation, and he down by your side?
What if he should stand at your bed's foot, in the
likeness of a corpse, with a bloody stain upon the
shroud? Sufficient without such guilt, is this
nightmare
of the soul; this heavy, heavy sinking of the
spirits; this wintry gloom about the heart; this
indistinct
horror of the mind, blending itself with the
darkness of the chamber.
By a desperate effort, you start upright, breaking
from a sort of conscious sleep, and gazing wildly
round the bed, as if the fiends were any where but
in your haunted mind. At the same moment, the
slumbering embers on the hearth send forth a gleam
which palely illuminates the whole outer room, and
flickers through the door of the bed-chamber, but
cannot quite dispel its obscurity. Your eye searches
for whatever may remind you of the living world.
With eager minuteness, you take note of the table
near the fire-place, the book with an ivory knife
between
its leaves, the unfolded letter, the hat and the
fallen glove. Soon the flame vanishes, and with it
the whole scene is gone, though its image remains an
instant in your mind's eye, when darkness has
swallowed
the reality. Throughout the chamber, there is
the same obscurity as before, but not the same gloom
within your breast. As your head falls back upon the
pillow, you think  in a whisper be it spoken  how
pleasant in these night solitudes, would be the rise
and fall of a softer breathing than your own, the
slight pressure of a tenderer bosom, the quiet throb
of a purer heart, imparting its peacefulness to your
troubled one, as if the fond sleeper were involving
you in her dream.
Her influence is over you, though she have no
existence
but in that momentary image. You sink
down in a flowery spot, on the borders of sleep and
wakefulness, while your thoughts rise before you in
pictures, all disconnected, yet all assimilated by a
pervading gladsomeness and beauty. The wheeling
of gorgeous squadrons, that glitter in the sun, is
succeeded
by the merriment of children round the door
of a school-house, beneath the glimmering shadow of
old trees, at the corner of a rustic lane. You stand
in the sunny rain of a summer shower, and wander
among the sunny trees of an autumnal wood, and
look upward at the brightest of all rainbows,
overarching
the unbroken sheet of snow, on the
American
side of Niagara. Your mind struggles pleasantly
between the dancing radiance round the hearth of a
young man and his recent bride, and the twittering
flight of birds in spring, about their new-made nest.
You feel the merry bounding of a ship before the
breeze; and watch the tuneful feet of rosy girls, as
they twine their last and merriest dance, in a
splendid
ball room; and find yourself in the brilliant
circle
of a crowded theatre, as the curtain falls over a
light and airy scene.
With an involuntary start, you seize hold on
consciousness
,
and prove yourself but half awake, by
running a doubtful parallel between human life and
the hour which has now elapsed. In both you emerge
from mystery, pass through a vicissitude that you can
but imperfectly control, and are borne onward to
another
mystery. Now comes the peal of the distant
clock, with fainter and fainter strokes as you plunge
farther into the wilderness of sleep. It is the knell of
a temporary death. Your spirit has departed, and
strays like a free citizen, among the people of a
shadowy world, beholding strange sights, yet without
wonder or dismay. So calm, perhaps, will be the
final change; so undisturbed, as if among familiar
things, the entrance of the soul to its Eternal home!
THE VILLAGE UNCLE.
AN IMAGINARY RETROSPECT.
Come
! another log upon the hearth. True, our little
parlor is comfortable, especially here, where the old
man sits in his old arm chair; but on Thanksgiving
night, the blaze should dance higher up the chimney,
and send a shower of sparks into the outer darkness.
Toss on an armful of those dry oak chips, the last
relicts of the Mermaid's knee timbers, the bones of
your namesake, Susan. Higher yet, and clearer be
the blaze, till our cottage windows glow the ruddiest
in the village, and the light of our household mirth
flash far across the bay to Nahant. And now, come,
Susan, come, my children, draw your chairs round
me, all of you. There is a dimness over your
figures
!
You sit quivering indistinctly with each
motion
of the blaze, which eddies about you like a flood,
so that you all have the look of visions, or people
that dwell only in the firelight, and will vanish from
existence, as completely as your own shadows, when
the flame shall sink among the embers. Hark! let
me listen for the swell of the surf; it should be
audible
a mile inland, on a night like this. Yes; there
I catch the sound, but only an uncertain murmur, as
if a good way down over the beach; though, by the
almanac, it is high tide at eight o'clock, and the
billows
must now be dashing within thirty yards of our
door. Ah! the old man's ears are failing him; and
so is his eye-sight, and perhaps his mind; else you
would not all be so shadowy, in the blaze of his
Thanksgiving fire.
How strangely the past is peeping over the
shoulders
of the present! To judge by my recollections,
it is but a few moments since I sat in another room;
yonder model of a vessel was not there, nor the old
chest of drawers, nor Susan's profile and mine, in
that gilt frame; nothing, in short, except this same
fire, which glimmered on books, papers, and a
picture
,
and half discovered my solitary figure in a
looking-glass. But it was paler than my rugged old
self, and younger, too, by almost half a century.
Speak to me, Susan; speak, my beloved ones; for the
scene is glimmering on my sight again, and as it
brightens you fade away. Oh! I should be loth to
lose my treasure of past happiness, and become once
more what I was then; a hermit in the depths of
my own mind; sometimes yawning over drowsy
volumes, and anon a scribbler of wearier trash than
what I read; a man who had wandered out of the
real world and got into its shadow, where his troubles,
joys and vicissitudes were of such slight stuff, that
he hardly knew whether he lived, or only dreamed
of living. Thank heaven, I am an old man now, and
have done with all such vanities.
Still this dimness of mine eyes! Come nearer,
Susan, and stand before the fullest blaze of the hearth.
Now I behold you illuminated from head to foot, in
your clean cap and decent gown, with the dear lock
of gray hair across your forehead, and a quiet smile
about your mouth, while the eyes alone are concealed,
by the red gleam of the fire upon your spectacles.
There, you made me tremble again! When the
flame quivered, my sweet Susan, you quivered with
it, and grew indistinct, as if melting into the warm
light, that my last glimpse of you might be as
visionary
as the first was, full many a year since. Do
you remember it? You stood on the little bridge,
over the brook that runs across King's Beach into the
sea. It was twilight; the waves rolling in, the wind
sweeping by, the crimson clouds fading in the west,
and the silver moon brightening above the hill; and
on the bridge were you, fluttering in the breeze like
a sea bird that might skim away at your pleasure.
You seemed a daughter of the viewless wind, a
creature
of the ocean foam and the crimson light, whose
merry life was spent in dancing on the crests of the
billows, that threw up their spray to support your
footsteps. As I drew nearer, I fancied you akin to
the race of mermaids, and thought how pleasant
it would be to dwell with you among the quiet coves,
in the shadow of the cliffs, and to roam along
secluded
beaches of the purest sand, and when our northern
shores grew bleak, to haunt the islands, green and
lonely, far amid summer seas. And yet it gladdened
me, after all this nonsense, to find you nothing but a
pretty young girl, sadly perplexed with the rude
behavior
of the wind about your petticoats.
Thus I did with Susan as with most other things in
my earlier days, dipping her image into my mind and
coloring it of a thousand fantastic hues, before I could
see her as she really was. Now, Susan, for a sober
picture of our village! It was a small collection of
dwellings that seemed to have been cast up by the
sea, with the rock weed and marine plants that it
vomits after a storm, or to have come ashore among
the pipe staves and other lumber, which had been
washed from the deck of an eastern schooner. There
was just space for the narrow and sandy street
between
the beach in front, and a precipitous hill that
lifted its rocky forehead in the rear, among a waste
of juniper bushes and the wild growth of a broken
pasture. The village was picturesque, in the variety
of its edifices, though all were rude. Here stood a
little old hovel, built, perhaps, of drift wood, there a
row of boat houses, and beyond them a two story
dwelling, of dark and weather-beaten aspect, the
whole intermixed with one or two snug cottages,
painted white, a sufficiency of pig-styes, and a
shoemaker's
shop. Two grocery stores stood opposite
each other, in the centre of the village. These were
the places of resort, at their idle hours, of a hardy
throng of fishermen, in red baize shirts, oil cloth
trousers, and boots of brown leather covering the
whole leg; true seven league boots, but fitter to wade
the ocean than walk the earth. The wearers seemed
amphibious, as if they did but creep out of salt water
to sun themselves; nor would it have been wonderful
to see their lower limbs covered with clusters of little
shell fish, such as cling to rocks and old ship timber
over which the tide ebbs and flows. When their
fleet of boats was weather bound, the butchers raised
their price, and the spit was busier than the frying
pan; for this was a place of fish, and known as such,
to all the country round about; the very air was fishy,
being perfumed with dead sculpins, hard heads and
dog fish, strewn plentifully on the beach. You see,
children, the village is but little changed, since your
mother and I were young.
How like a dream it was, when I bent over a pool
of water, one pleasant morning, and saw that the
ocean had dashed its spray over me and made me a
fisherman! There was the tarpaulin, the baize shirt,
the oil cloth trousers and seven league boots, and
there my own features, but so reddened with
sunburn
and sea breezes, that methought I had another
face, and on other shoulders too. The sea gulls and
the loons, and I, had now all one trade; we skimmed
the crested waves and sought our prey beneath them,
the man with as keen enjoyment as the birds.
Always
when the east grew purple, I launched my dory,
my little flat-bottomed skiff, and rowed cross-handed to
Point Ledge, the Middle Ledge, or, perhaps, beyond
Egg Rock; often, too, did I anchor off Dread Ledge, a
spot of peril to ships unpiloted; and sometimes spread
an adventurous sail and tracked across the bay to
South Shore, casting my lines in sight of Scituate.
Ere night fall, I hauled my skiff high and dry on the
beach, laden with red rock cod, or the white bellied
ones of deep water; haddock, bearing the black
marks of Saint Peter's fingers near the gills; the
long-bearded hake, whose liver holds oil enough for
a midnight lamp; and now and then a mighty
halibut
,
with a back broad as my boat. In the autumn,
I toled and caught those lovely fish, the mackerel.
When the wind was high; when the whale boats,
anchored
off the Point, nodded their slender masts at
each other, and the dories pitched and tossed in the
surf; when Nahant Beach was thundering three
miles off, and the spray broke a hundred feet in air,
round the distant base of Egg Rock; when the
brimful
and boisterous sea threatened to tumble over the
street of our village; then I made a holiday on shore.
Many such a day did I sit snugly in Mr. Bartlett's
store, attentive to the yarns of uncle Parker; uncle
to the whole village, by right of seniority, but of
southern blood, with no kindred in New England.
His figure is before me now, enthroned upon a
mackerel
barrel; a lean old man, of great height, but bent
with years, and twisted into an uncouth shape by
seven broken limbs; furrowed also, and
weather-worn
,
as if every gale, for the better part of a
century
,
had caught him some where on the sea. He
looked like a harbinger of tempest; a shipmate of
the Flying Dutchman. After innumerable voyages
aboard men-of-war and merchantmen, fishing
schooners
and chebacco boats, the old salt had become
master of a hand-cart, which he daily trundled about
the vicinity, and sometimes blew his fish horn through
the streets of Salem. One of uncle Parker's eyes
had been blown out with gunpowder, and the other
did but glimmer in its socket. Turning it upward as
he spoke, it was his delight to tell of cruises against
the French, and battles with his own shipmates, when
he and an antagonist used to be seated astride of a
sailor's chest, each fastened down by a spike nail
through his trousers, and there to fight it out.
Sometimes
he expatiated on the delicious flavor of the
hagden
,
a greasy and goose-like fowl, which the sailors
catch with hook and line on the Grand Banks. He dwelt
with rapture on an interminable winter at the Isle of
Sables, where he had gladdened himself, amid polar
snows, with the rum and sugar saved from the wreck
of a West India schooner. And wrathfully did he
shake his fist, as he related how a party of Cape Cod
men had robbed him and his companions of their
lawful
spoil, and sailed away with every keg of old
Jamaica
,
leaving him not a drop to drown his sorrow.
Villains they were, and of that wicked brotherhood
who are said to tie lanterns to horses' tails, to mislead
the mariner along the dangerous shores of the Cape.
Even now, I seem to see the group of fishermen,
with that old salt in the midst. One fellow sits on the
counter, a second bestrides an oil barrel, a third lolls
at his length on a parcel of new cod lines, and
another
has planted the tarry seat of his trousers on a
heap of salt, which will shortly be sprinkled over a
lot of fish. They are a likely set of men. Some
have voyaged to the East Indies or the Pacific, and
most of them have sailed in Marblehead schooners to
Newfoundland; a few have been no farther than the
Middle Banks, and one or two have always fished along
the shore; but as uncle Parker used to say, they have
all been christened in salt water, and know more than
men ever learn in the bushes. A curious figure, by
way of contrast, is a fish-dealer from far up-country,
listening with eyes wide open, to narratives that might
startle Sinbad the sailor. Be it well with you, my
brethren! Ye are all gone, some to your graves
ashore, and others to the depths of ocean; but my
faith is strong that ye are happy; for whenever I
behold
your forms, whether in dream or vision, each
departed friend is puffing his long nine, and a mug of
the right black strap goes round from lip to lip!
But where was the mermaid in those delightful
times? At a certain window near the centre of the
village, appeared a pretty display of gingerbread
men and horses, picture books and ballads, small
fishhooks
,
pins, needles, sugar-plums and brass thimbles,
articles on which the young fishermen used to expend
their money from pure gallantry. What a picture
was Susan behind the counter! A slender maiden,
though the child of rugged parents, she had the
slimmest
of all waists, brown hair curling on her neck,
and a complexion rather pale, except when the sea
breeze flushed it. A few freckles became beauty spots
beneath her eyelids. How was it, Susan, that you
talked and acted so carelessly, yet always for the
best, doing whatever was right in your own eyes, and
never once doing wrong in mine, nor shocked a taste
that had been morbidly sensitive till now? And
whence had you that happiest gift, of brightening
every topic with an unsought gayety, quiet but
irresistible
,
so that even gloomy spirits felt your sunshine,
and did not shrink from it? Nature wrought the
charm. She made you a frank, simple, kind-hearted,
sensible and mirthful girl. Obeying nature, you did
free things without indelicacy, displayed a maiden's
thoughts to every eye, and proved yourself as
innocent
as naked Eve.
It was beautiful to observe, how her simple and
happy nature mingled itself with mine. She kindled
a domestic fire within my heart, and took up her
dwelling there, even in that chill and lonesome cavern,
hung round with glittering icicles of fancy. She
gave me warmth of feeling, while the influence of
my mind made her contemplative. I taught her to
love the moonlight hour, when the expanse of the
encircled
bay was smooth as a great mirror and slept in
a transparent shadow; while beyond Nahant, the
wind rippled the dim ocean into a dreamy brightness,
which grew faint afar off, without becoming gloomier.
I held her hand and pointed to the long surf-wave, as
it rolled calmly on the beach, in an unbroken line of
silver; we were silent together, till its deep and
peaceful murmur had swept by us. When the
Sabbath
sun shone down into the recesses of the cliffs, I
led the mermaid thither, and told her that those huge,
gray, shattered rocks, and her native sea, that raged
for ever like a storm against them, and her own
slender
beauty, in so stern a scene, were all combined
into a strain of poetry. But on the Sabbath eve,
when her mother had gone early to bed, and her
gentle sister had smiled and left us, as we sat alone
by the quiet hearth, with household things around, it
was her turn to make me feel, that here was a
deeper poetry, and that this was the dearest hour of
all. Thus went on our wooing, till I had shot wild
fowl enough to feather our bridal bed, and the
Daughter
of the Sea was mine.
I built a cottage for Susan and myself, and made
a gateway in the form of a Gothic arch, by setting up
a whale's jaw bones. We bought a heifer with her
first calf, and had a little garden on the hill side, to
supply us with potatoes and green sauce for our fish.
Our parlor, small and neat, was ornamented with our
two profiles in one gilt frame, and with shells and
pretty pebbles on the mantelpiece, selected from the
sea's treasury of such things, on Nahant Beach. On
the desk, beneath the looking-glass, lay the Bible,
which I had begun to read aloud at the book of
Genesis
,
and the singing book that Susan used for her
evening psalm. Except the almanac, we had no
other literature. All that I heard of books, was
when an Indian history, or tale of shipwreck, was
sold by a pedler or wandering subscription man, to
some one in the village, and read through its owner's
nose to a slumbrous auditory. Like my brother
fishermen
,
I grew into the belief that all human erudition
was collected in our pedagogue, whose green
spectacles
VOL. II. 8
and solemn phiz, as he passed to his little school
house, amid a waste of sand, might have gained him
a diploma from any college in New England. In
truth I dreaded him. When our children were old
enough to claim his care, you remember, Susan, how
I frowned, though you were pleased, at this learned
man's encomiums on their proficiency. I feared to
trust them even with the alphabet; it was the key to
a fatal treasure.
But I loved to lead them by their little hands along
the beach, and point to nature in the vast and the
minute, the sky, the sea, the green earth, the pebbles
and the shells. Then did I discourse of the mighty
works and coextensive goodness of the Deity, with
the simple wisdom of a man whose mind had profited
by lonely days upon the deep, and his heart by the
strong and pure affections of his evening home.
Sometimes my voice lost itself in a tremulous depth;
for I felt His eye upon me as I spoke. Once, while
my wife and all of us were gazing at ourselves, in
the mirror left by the tide in a hollow of the sand, I
pointed to the pictured Heaven below, and bade her
observe how religion was strewn every where in our
path; since even a casual pool of water recalled the
idea of that home whither we were travelling, to rest
for ever with our children. Suddenly, your image,
Susan, and all the little faces made up of yours and
mine, seemed to fade away and vanish around me,
leaving a pale visage like my own of former days
within the frame of a large looking-glass. Strange
illusion!
My life glided on, the past appearing to mingle
with the present and absorb the future, till the whole
lies before me at a glance. My manhood has long
been waning with a stanch decay; my earlier
contemporaries
,
after lives of unbroken health, are all at
rest, without having known the weariness of later age;
and now with a wrinkled forehead and thin white hair
as badges of my dignity, I have become the patriarch,
the Uncle of the village. I love that name; it widens
the circle of my sympathies; it joins all the youthful
to my household, in the kindred of affection.
Like uncle Parker, whose rheumatic bones were
dashed against Egg Rock, full forty years ago, I am
a spinner of long yarns. Seated on the gunnel of a
dory, or on the sunny side of a boat house, where
the warmth is grateful to my limbs, or by my own
hearth, when a friend or two are there, I
overflow
with talk, and yet am never tedious. With a
broken voice I give utterance to much wisdom.
Such, heaven be praised! is the vigor of my
faculties
,
that many a forgotten usage, and traditions
ancient
in my youth, and early adventures of myself
or others, hitherto effaced by things more recent,
acquire new distinctness in my memory. I
remember
the happy days when the haddock were more
numerous on all the fishing grounds than sculpins in
the surf; when the deep water cod swam close in
shore, and the dog-fish, with his poisonous horn, had
not learnt to take the hook. I can number every
equinoctial storm, in which the sea has overwhelmed
the street, flooded the cellars of the village, and
hissed upon our kitchen hearth. I give the history
of the great whale that was landed on Whale Beach,
and whose jaws, being now my gate way, will last
for ages after my coffin shall have passed beneath
them. Thence it is an easy digression to the halibut,
scarcely smaller than the whale, which ran out six
codlines, and hauled my dory to the mouth of Boston
harbor, before I could touch him with the gaff.
If melancholy accidents be the theme of
conversation
,
I tell how a friend of mine was taken out of his
boat by an enormous shark; and the sad, true tale
of a young man on the eve of marriage, who had
been nine days missing, when his drowned body
floated into the very pathway, on Marblehead neck,
that had often led him to the dwelling of his bride;
as if the dripping corpse would have come where the
mourner was. With such awful fidelity did that
lover return to fulfil his vows! Another favorite
story is of a crazy maiden, who conversed with
angels
and had the gift of prophecy, and whom all the
village loved and pitied, though she went from door
to door accusing us of sin, exhorting to repentance,
and foretelling our destruction by flood or
earthquake
.
If the young men boast their knowledge of
the ledges and sunken rocks, I speak of pilots who
knew the wind by its scent and the wave by its taste,
and could have steered blindfold to any port between
Boston and Mount Desert, guided only by the rote of
the shore; the peculiar sound of the surf on each
island, beach, and line of rocks, along the coast.
Thus do I talk, and all my auditors grow wise, while
they deem it pastime.
I recollect no happier portion of my life, than this,
my calm old age. It is like the sunny and sheltered
slope of a valley, where, lute in the autumn, the grass
is greener than in August, and intermixed with golden
dandelions, that had not been seen till now, since the
first warmth of the year. But with me, the verdure
and the flowers are not frost-bitten in the midst of
winter. A playfulness has revisited my mind; a
sympathy with the young and gay; an unpainful
interest in the business of others; a light and
wandering
curiosity; arising, perhaps, from the sense
that my toil on earth is ended, and the brief hour till
bedtime may be spent in play. Still, I have fancied
that there is a depth of feeling and reflection, under
this superficial levity, peculiar to one who has lived
long, and is soon to die.
Show me any thing that would make an infant
smile, and you shall behold a gleam of mirth over
the hoary ruin of my visage. I can spend a pleasant
hour in the sun, watching the sports of the village
children, on the edge of the surf; now they chase
the retreating wave far down over the wet sand;
now it steals softly up to kiss their naked feet; now
it comes onward with threatening front, and roars
after the laughing crew, as they scamper beyond its
reach. Why should not an old man be merry too,
when the great sea is at play with those little
children
?
I delight, also, to follow in the wake of a
pleasure party of young men and girls, strolling
along the beach after an early supper at the Point.
Here, with handkerchiefs at nose, they bend over a
heap of eel grass, entangled in which is a dead skate,
so oddly accoutred with two legs and a long tail, that
they mistake him for a drowned animal. A few
steps further, the ladies scream, and the gentlemen
make ready to protect them against a young shark of
the dog-fish kind, rolling with a lifelike motion in the
tide that has thrown him up. Next, they are smit
with wonder at the black shells of a wagon load of
live lobsters, packed in rock weed for the country
market. And when they reach the fleet of dories,
just hauled ashore after the day's fishing, how do I
laugh in my sleeve, and sometimes roar outright, at
the simplicity of these young folks and the sly humor
of the fishermen! In winter, when our village is
thrown into a bustle by the arrival of perhaps a score
of country dealers, bargaining for frozen fish, to be
transported hundreds of miles, and eaten fresh in
Vermont or Canada, I am a pleased but idle
spectator
in the throng. For I launch my boat no more.
When the shore was solitary, I have found a
pleasure
that seemed even to exalt my mind, in observing
the sports or contentions of two gulls, as they wheeled
and hovered about each other, with hoarse screams,
one moment flapping on the foam of the wave, and
then soaring aloft, till their white bosoms melted into
the upper sunshine. In the calm of the summer
sunset
,
I drag my aged limbs, with a little ostentation of
activity, because I am so old, up to the rocky brow
of the hill. There I see the white sails of many a
vessel, outward bound or homeward from afar, and
the black trail of a vapor behind the eastern
steamboat
;
there, too, is the sun, going down, but not in
gloom, and there the illimitable ocean mingling with
the sky, to remind me of Eternity.
But sweetest of all is the hour of cheerful musing
and pleasant talk, that comes between the dusk and
the lighted candle, by my glowing fireside. And
never, even on the first Thanksgiving night, when
Susan and I sat alone with our hopes, nor the second,
when a stranger had been sent to gladden us, and be
the visible image of our affection, did I feel such joy
as now. All that belong to me are here; Death has
taken none, nor Disease kept them away, nor Strife
divided them from their parents or each other; with
neither poverty nor riches to disturb them, nor the
misery of desires beyond their lot, they have kept
New England's festival round the patriarch's board.
For I am a patriarch! Here I sit among my
descendants
,
in my old arm chair and immemorial
corner
,
while the firelight throws an appropriate glory
round my venerable frame. Susan! My children!
Something whispers me, that this happiest hour must
be the final one, and that nothing remains but to
bless you all, and depart with a treasure of recollected
joys to Heaven. Will you meet me there? Alas!
your figures grow indistinct, fading into pictures on
the air, and now to fainter outlines, while the fire is
glimmering on the walls of a familiar room, and
shows the book that I flung down, and the sheet that
I left half written, some fifty years ago. I lift my
eyes to the looking-glass, and perceive myself alone,
unless those be the mermaid's features, retiring into
the depths of the mirror, with a tender and
melancholy
smile.
Ah! One feels a chillness, not bodily, but about
the heart, and, moreover a foolish dread of looking
behind him, after these pastimes. I can imagine
precisely
how a magician would sit down in gloom and
terror, after dismissing the shadows that had
personated
dead or distant people, and stripping his cavern
of the unreal splendor which had changed it to a
palace. And now for a moral to my reverie. Shall
it be, that, since fancy can create so bright a dream
of happiness, it were better to dream on from youth
to age, than to awake and strive doubtfully for
something
real! Oh! the slight tissue of a dream can no
more preserve us from the stern reality of misfortune,
than a robe of cobweb could repel the wintry blast.
Be this the moral, then. In chaste and warm
affections
,
humble wishes, and honest toil for some useful
end, there is health for the mind, and quiet for the
heart, the prospect of a happy life, and the fairest
hope of Heaven.
THE AMBITIOUS GUEST.
One
September night, a family had gathered round
their hearth, and piled it high with the drift-wood of
mountain-streams, the dry cones of the pine, and the
splintered ruins of great trees, that had come
crashing
down the precipice. Up the chimney roared the
fire, and brightened the room with its broad blaze.
The faces of the father and mother had a sober
gladness
;
the children laughed; the eldest daughter was
the image of Happiness at seventeen; and the aged
grandmother, who sat knitting in the warmest place,
was the image of Happiness grown old. They had
found the `herb, heart's ease,' in the bleakest spot of
all New England. This family were situated in the
Notch of the White Hills, where the wind was sharp
throughout the year, and pitilessly cold in the
winter
giving their cottage all its fresh inclemency,
before it descended on the valley of the Saco. They
dwelt in a cold spot and a dangerous one; for a
mountain towered above their heads, so steep, that the
stones would often rumble down its sides, and startle
them at midnight.
The daughter had just uttered some simple jest,
that filled them all with mirth, when the wind came
through the Notch and seemed to pause before their
cottage  rattling the door, with a sound of wailing
and lamentation, before it passed into the valley.
For a moment, it saddened them, though there was
nothing unusual in the tones. But the family were
glad again, when they perceived that the latch was
lifted by some traveller, whose footsteps had been
unheard
amid the dreary blast, which heralded his
approach
,
and wailed as he was entering, and went
moaning away from the door.
Though they dwelt in such a solitude, these people
held daily converse with the world. The romantic
pass of the Notch is a great artery, through which
the life-blood of internal commerce is continually
throbbing, between Maine, on one side, and the Green
Mountains and the shores of the St. Lawrence on the
other. The stage-coach always drew up before the
door of the cottage. The wayfarer, with no
companion
but his staff, paused here to exchange a word,
that the sense of loneliness might not utterly
overcome
him, ere he could pass through the cleft of the
mountain, or reach the first house in the valley.
And here the teamster, on his way to Portland
market
,
would put up for the night  and, if a bachelor,
might sit an hour beyond the usual bed-time, and
steal a kiss from the mountain maid, at parting. It
was one of those primitive taverns, where the traveller
pays only for food and lodging, but meets with a
homely kindness, beyond all price. When the
footsteps
were heard, therefore, between the outer door
and the inner one, the whole family rose up,
grandmother
,
children, and all, as if about to welcome
some one who belonged to them, and whose fate was
linked with theirs.
The door was opened by a young man. His face
at first wore the melancholy expression, almost
despondency
,
of one who travels a wild and bleak road,
at night-fall and alone, but soon brightened up, when
he saw the kindly warmth of his reception. He felt
his heart spring forward to meet them all, from the
old woman, who wiped a chair with her apron, to the
little child that held out its arms to him. One glance
and smile placed the stranger on a footing of
innocent
familiarity with the eldest daughter.
`Ah, this fire is the right thing!' cried he; `
especially
when there is such a pleasant circle round it.
I am quite benumbed; for the Notch is just like the
pipe of a great pair of bellows; it has blown a
terrible
blast in my face, all the way from Bartlett.'
`Then you are going towards Vermont?' said the
master of the house, as he helped to take a light
knapsack off the young man's shoulders.
`Yes; to Burlington, and far enough beyond,'
replied
he. `I meant to have been at Ethan
Crawford's
to-night; but a pedestrian lingers along such
a road as this. It is no matter; for, when I saw this
good fire, and all your cheerful faces, I felt as if you
had kindled it on purpose for me, and were waiting
my arrival. So I shall sit down among you, and
make myself at home.'
The frank-hearted stranger had just drawn his chair
to the fire, when something like a heavy footstep was
heard without, rushing down the steep side of the
mountain, as with long and rapid strides, and taking
such a leap, in passing the cottage, as to strike the
opposite precipice. The family held their breath,
because they knew the sound, and their guest held
his, by instinct.
`The old Mountain has thrown a stone at us, for
fear we should forget him,' said the landlord,
recovering
himself. `He sometimes nods his head, and
threatens to come down; but we are old neighbors,
and agree together pretty well, upon the whole.
Besides
,
we have a sure place of refuge, hard by, if he
should be coming in good earnest.'
Let us now suppose the stranger to have finished
his supper of bear's meat; and, by his natural felicity
of manner, to have placed himself on a footing of
kindness with the whole family  so that they talked
as freely together, as if he belonged to their
mountain
brood. He was of a proud, yet gentle spirit
haughty and reserved among the rich and great; but
ever ready to stoop his head to the lowly cottage
door, and be like a brother or a son at the poor
man's fireside. In the household of the Notch, he
found warmth and simplicity of feeling, the pervading
intelligence of New England, and a poetry of native
growth, which they had gathered, when they little
thought of it, from the mountain-peaks and chasms,
and at the very threshold of their romantic and
dangerous
abode. He had travelled far and alone; his
whole life, indeed, had been a solitary path; for,
with the lofty caution of his nature, he had kept
himself
apart from those who might otherwise have been
his companions. The family, too, though so kind
and hospitable, had that consciousness of unity among
themselves, and separation from the world at large,
which, in every domestic circle, should still keep a
holy place, where no stranger may intrude. But,
this evening, a prophetic sympathy impelled the
refined
and educated youth to pour out his heart before
the simple mountaineers, and constrained them to
answer him with the same free confidence. And
thus it should have been. Is not the kindred of a
common fate a closer tie than that of birth?
The secret of the young man's character was, a
high and abstracted ambition. He could have borne
to live an undistinguished life, but not to be forgotten
in the grave. Yearning desire had been transformed
to hope; and hope, long cherished, had become like
certainty, that, obscurely as he journeyed now, a
glory was to beam on all his path-way  though not,
perhaps, while he was treading it. But, when
posterity
should gaze back into the gloom of what was
now the present, they would trace the brightness of
his footsteps, brightening as meaner glories faded, and
confess, that a gifted one had passed from his cradle
to his tomb, with none to recognise him.
`As yet,' cried the stranger  his cheek glowing
and his eye flashing with enthusiasm  `as yet, I have
done nothing. Were I to vanish from the earth
to-morrow
,
none would know so much of me as you;
that a nameless youth came up, at night-fall, from
the valley of the Saco, and opened his heart to you
in the evening, and passed through the Notch, by
sunrise, and was seen no more. Not a soul would
ask  "Who was he?  Whither did the wanderer
go?" But, I cannot die till I have achieved my
destiny
.
Then, let Death come! I shall have built my
monument!'
There was a continual flow of natural emotion,
gushing forth amid abstracted reverie, which enabled
the family to understand this young man's sentiments,
though so foreign from their own. With quick
sensibility
of the ludicrous, he blushed at the ardor into
which he had been betrayed.
`You laugh at me,' said he, taking the eldest
daughter's hand, and laughing himself. `You think
my ambition as nonsensical as if I were to freeze
myself to death on the top of Mount Washington,
only that people might spy at me from the country
roundabout. And truly, that would be a noble
pedestal
for a man's statue!'
`It is better to sit here by this fire,' answered the
girl, blushing, `and be comfortable and contented,
though nobody thinks about us.'
`I suppose,' said her father, after a fit of musing,
`there is something natural in what the young man
says; and if my mind had been turned that way, I
might have felt just the same. It is strange, wife,
VOL. II. 9
how his talk has set my head running on things, that
are pretty certain never to come to pass.'
`Perhaps they may,' observed the wife. `Is the
man thinking what he will do when he is a widower?'
`No, no!' cried he, repelling the idea with
reproachful
kindness. `When I think of your death,
Esther, I think of mine, too. But I was wishing we
had a good farm, in Bartlett, or Bethlehem, or
Littleton
,
or some other township round the White
Mountains; but not where they could tumble on our
heads. I should want to stand well with my
neighbors
,
and be called 'Squire, and sent to General
Court, for a term or two; for a plain, honest man
may do as much good there as a lawyer. And when
I should be grown quite an old man, and you an old
woman, so as not to be long apart, I might die happy
enough in my bed, and leave you all crying around
me. A slate grave-stone would suit me as well as a
marble one  with just my name and age, and a
verse of a hymn, and something to let people know,
that I lived an honest man and died a Christian.'
`There now!' exclaimed the stranger; `it is our
nature to desire a monument, be it slate, or marble,
or a pillar of granite, or a glorious memory in the
universal heart of man.'
`We're in a strange way, to-night,' said the wife,
with tears in her eyes. `They say it's a sign of
something, when folks' minds go a wandering so.
Hark to the children!'
They listened accordingly. The younger
children
had been put to bed in another room, but with
an open door between, so that they could be heard
talking busily among themselves. One and all
seemed
to have caught the infection from the fireside
circle, and were outvying each other, in wild wishes,
and childish projects of what they would do, when
they came to be men and women. At length, a little
boy, instead of addressing his brothers and sisters,
called out to his mother.
`I'll tell you what I wish, mother,' cried he. `I
want you and father and grandma'm, and all of us,
and the stranger too, to start right away, and go and
take a drink out of the basin of the Flume!'
Nobody could help laughing at the child's notion of
leaving a warm bed, and dragging them from a
cheerful fire, to visit the basin of the Flumea
brook, which tumbles over the precipice, deep within
the Notch. The boy had hardly spoken, when a
wagon rattled along the road, and stopped a moment
before the door. It appeared to contain two or three
men, who were cheering their hearts with the rough
chorus of a song, which resounded, in broken notes,
between the cliffs, while the singers hesitated whether
to continue their journey, or put up here for the
night.'
`Father,' said the girl, `they are calling you by
name.'
But the good man doubted whether they had really
called him, and was unwilling to show himself too
solicitous of gain, by inviting people to patronize his
house. He therefore did not hurry to the door; and
the lash being soon applied, the travellers plunged
into the Notch, still singing and laughing, though
their music and mirth came back drearily from the
heart of the mountain.
`There, mother!' cried the boy, again. `They'd
have given us a ride to the Flume.'
Again they laughed at the child's pertinacious
fancy for a night-ramble. But it happened, that a
light cloud passed over the daughter's spirit; she
looked gravely into the fire, and drew a breath that
was almost a sigh. It forced its way, in spite of a
little struggle to repress it. Then starting and
blushing
,
she looked quickly round the circle, as if they
had caught a glimpse into her bosom. The stranger
asked what she had been thinking of.
`Nothing,' answered she, with a downcast smile.
`Only I felt lonesome just then.'
`Oh, I have always had a gift of feeling what is
in other people's hearts,' said he, half seriously.
`Shall I tell the secrets of yours? For I know what
to think, when a young girl shivers by a warm hearth,
and complains of lonesomeness at her mother's side.
Shall I put these feelings into words?'
`They would not be a girl's feelings any longer,
if they could be put into words,' replied the
mountain
nymph, laughing, but avoiding his eye.
All this was said apart. Perhaps a germ of love
was springing in their hearts, so pure that it might
blossom in Paradise, since it could not be matured on
earth; for women worship such gentle dignity as
his; and the proud, contemplative, yet kindly soul is
oftenest captivated by simplicity like hers. But,
while they spoke softly, and he was watching the
happy sadness, the lightsome shadows, the shy
yearnings
of a maiden's nature, the wind, through the
Notch, took a deeper and drearier sound. It seemed,
as the fanciful stranger said, like the choral strain of
the spirits of the blast, who, in old Indian times, had
their dwelling among these mountains, and made
their heights and recesses a sacred region. There
was a wail, along the road, as if a funeral were
passing
.
To chase away the gloom, the family threw pine
branches on their fire, till the dry leaves crackled
and the flame arose, discovering once again a scene
of peace and humble happiness. The light hovered
about them fondly, and caressed them all. There
were the little faces of the children, peeping from
their bed apart, and here the father's frame of
strength, the mother's subdued and careful mien, the
high-browed youth, the budding girl, and the good
old grandam, still knitting in the warmest place.
The aged woman looked up from her task, and, with
fingers ever busy, was the next to speak.
`Old folks have their notions,' said she, `as well
as young ones. You've been wishing and planning;
and letting your heads run on one thing and another,
till you've set my mind a wandering too. Now what
should an old woman wish for, when she can go but
a step or two before she comes to her grave?
Children
,
it will haunt me night and day, till I tell you.'
`What is it, mother?' cried the husband and wife,
at once.
Then the old woman, with an air of mystery,
which drew the circle closer round the fire, informed
them that she had provided her grave-clothes some
years before  a nice linen shroud, a cap with a
muslin ruff, and every thing of a finer sort than she
had worn since her wedding-day. But, this evening,
an old superstition had strangely recurred to her. It
used to be said, in her younger days, that, if any
thing were amiss with a corpse, if only the ruff were
not smooth, or the cap did not set right, the corpse,
in the coffin and beneath the clods, would strive to
put up its cold hands and arrange it. The bare
thought made her nervous.
`Don't talk so, grandmother!' said the girl,
shuddering
.
`Now,'  continued the old woman, with singular
earnestness, yet smiling strangely at her own folly,
`I want one of you, my children  when your mother
is drest, and in the coffin  I want one of you to hold
a looking-glass over my face. Who knows but I
may take a glimpse at myself, and see whether all 's
right?'
`Old and young, we dream of graves and
monuments
,'
murmured the stranger youth. `I wonder
how mariners feel, when the ship is sinking, and
they, unknown and undistinguished, are to be buried
together in the ocean  that wide and nameless
sepulchre
!'
For a moment, the old woman's ghastly
conception
so engrossed the minds of her hearers, that a
sound, abroad in the night, rising like the roar of a
blast, had grown broad, deep, and terrible, before the
fated group were conscious of it. The house, and
all within it, trembled; the foundations of the earth
seemed to be shaken, as if this awful sound were the
peal of the last trump. Young and old exchanged
one wild glance, and remained an instant, pale,
affrighted, without utterance, or power to move.
Then the same shriek burst simultaneously from all
their lips.
`The Slide! The Slide!'
The simplest words must intimate, but not portray,
the unutterable horror of the catastrophe. The
victims
rushed from their cottage, and sought refuge in
what they deemed a safer spot  where, in
contemplation
of such an emergency, a sort of barrier had
been reared. Alas! they had quitted their security,
and fled right into the pathway of destruction. Down
came the whole side of the mountain, in a cataract
of ruin. Just before it reached the house, the stream
broke into two branches  shivered not a window
there, but overwhelmed the whole vicinity, blocked
up the road, and annihilated every thing in its
dreadful
course. Long ere the thunder of that great Slide
had ceased to roar among the mountains, the mortal
agony had been endured, and the victims were at
peace. Their bodies were never found.
The next morning, the light smoke was seen
stealing
from the cottage chimney, up the mountain-side.
Within, the fire was yet smouldering on the hearth,
and the chairs in a circle round it, as if the
inhabitants
had but gone forth to view the devastation of the
Slide, and would shortly return, to thank Heaven
for their miraculous escape. All had left separate
tokens, by which those, who had known the family,
were made to shed a tear for each. Who has not
heard their name? The story had been told far and
wide, and will for ever be a legend of these
mountains
.
Poets have sung their fate.
There were circumstances, which led some to
suppose
that a stranger had been received into the
cottage
on this awful night, and had shared the
catastrophe
of all its inmates. Others denied that there
were sufficient grounds for such a conjecture. Wo,
for the high-souled youth, with his dream of Earthly
Immortality! His name and person utterly unknown;
his history, his way of life, his plans, a mystery never
to be solved; his death and his existence, equally
a doubt! Whose was the agony of that
death-moment
?
THE SISTER YEARS.
Last
night, between eleven and twelve o'clock, when
the Old Year was leaving her final foot-prints on the
borders of Time's empire, she found herself in
possession
of a few spare moments, and sat down
of all places in the world  on the steps of our new
City Hall. The wintry moonlight showed that she
looked weary of body, and sad of heart, like many
another wayfarer of earth. Her garments, having
been exposed to much foul weather and rough usage,
were in very ill condition; and as the hurry of her
journey had never before allowed her to take an
instant's rest, her shoes were so worn as to be
scarcely worth the mending. But, after trudging only
a little distance further, this poor Old Year was
destined
to enjoy a long, long sleep. I forgot to
mention
,
that when she seated herself on the steps, she
deposited by her side a very capacious band-box, in
which, as is the custom among travellers of her sex,
she carried a great deal of valuable property. Besides
this luggage, there was a folio book under her arm,
very much resembling the annual volume of a
newspaper
.
Placing this volume across her knees, and
resting her elbows upon it, with her forehead in her
hands, the weary, bedraggled, world-worn Old Year
heaved a heavy sigh, and appeared to be taking no
very pleasant retrospect of her past existence.
While she thus awaited the midnight knell, that was
to summon her to the innumerable sisterhood of
departe
.
Years, there came a young maiden treading
lightsomely on tip-toe along the street, from the
direction
of the Railroad Dept. She was evidently a
stranger, and perhaps had come to town by the
evening
train of cars. There was a smiling cheerfulness
in this fair maiden's face, which bespoke her fully
confident of a kind reception from the multitude of
people, with whom she was soon to form
acquaintance
.
Her dress was rather too airy for the season,
and was bedizened with fluttering ribbons and other
vanities, which were likely soon to be rent away by
the fierce storms, or to fade in the hot sunshine, amid
which she was to pursue her changeful course. But
still she was a wonderfully pleasant looking figure,
and had so much promise and such an indescribable
hopefulness in her aspect, that hardly any body could
meet her without anticipating some very desirable thing
the consummation of some long sought good
from her kind offices. A few dismal characters there
may be, here and there about the world, who have so
often been trifled with by young maidens as promising
as she, that they have now ceased to pin any faith
upon the skirts of the New Year. But, for my own
part, I have great faith in her; and should I live to
see fifty more such, still, from each of those
successive
sisters, I shall reckon upon receiving something
that will be worth living for.
The New Year  for this young maiden was no
less a personage  carried all her goods and chattels
in a basket of no great size or weight, which hung
upon her arm. She greeted the disconsolate Old
Year with great affection, and sat down beside her on
the steps of the City Hall, waiting for the signal to
begin her rambles through the world. The two were
own sisters, being both grand daughters of Time; and
though one looked so much older than the other, it
was rather owing to hardships and trouble than to
age, since there was but a twelvemonth's difference
between them.
`Well, my dear sister,' said the New Year, after
the first salutations, `you look almost tired to death.
What have you been about during your sojourn in
this part of Infinite Space?'
`Oh, I have it all recorded here in my Book of
Chronicles,' answered the Old Year, in a heavy tone.
`There is nothing that would amuse you; and you
will soon get sufficient knowledge of such matters
from your own personal experience. It is but
tiresome
reading.'
Neverthless, she turned over the leaves of the folio,
and glanced at them by the light of the moon, feeling
an irresistible spell of interest in her own biography,
although its incidents were remembered without
pleasure
.
The volume, though she termed it her Book of
Chronicles, seemed to be neither more nor less than
the Salem Gazette for 1838; in the accuracy of which
journal this sagacious Old Year had so much
confidence
,
that she deemed it needless to record her
history
with her own pen.
`What have you been doing in the political way?'
asked the New Year.
`Why, my course here in the United States,' said
the Old Year  `though perhaps I ought to blush at
the confession  my political course, I must
acknowledge
,
has been rather vacillatory, sometimes
inclining
towards the Whigs  then causing the
Administration
party to shout for triumph  and now again
uplifting what seemed the almost prostrate banner of
the Opposition; so that historians will hardly know
what to make of me, in this respect. But the Loco
Focos '
`I do not like these party nicknames,' interrupted
her sister, who seemed remarkably touchy about some
points. `Perhaps we shall part in better humor, if
we avoid any political discussion.'
`With all my heart,' replied the Old Year, who
had already been tormented half to death with
squabbles
of this kind. `I care not if the names of Whig
or Tory, with their interminable brawls about Banks
and the Sub Treasury, Abolition, Texas, the Florida
War, and a million of other topics  which you will
learn soon enough for your own comfort  I care not,
I say, if no whisper of these matters ever reaches my
ears again. Yet they have occupied so large a share of
my attention, that I scarcely know what else to tell
you. There has indeed been a curious sort of war
on the Canada border, where blood has streamed in
the names of Liberty and Patriotism; but it must
remain
for some future, perhaps far distant Year, to tell
whether or no those holy names have been rightfully
invoked. Nothing so much depresses me, in my
view of mortal affairs, as to see high energies wasted,
and human life and happiness thrown away, for ends
that appear oftentimes unwise; and still oftener
remain
unaccomplished. But the wisest people and the
best keep a steadfast faith that the progress of
Mankind
is onward and upward, and that the toil and
anguish
of the path serve to wear away the
imperfections
of the Immortal Pilgrim, and will be felt no
more, when they have done their office.'
`Perhaps,' cried the hopeful New Year  `perhaps
I shall see that happy day!'
`I doubt whether it be so close at hand,' answered
the Old Year, gravely smiling. `You will soon grow
weary of looking for that blessed consummation, and
will turn for amusement (as has frequently been my
own practice) to the affairs of some sober little city,
like this of Salem. Here we sit, on the steps of the
new City Hall, which has been completed under my
administration; and it would make you laugh to see
how the game of politics, of which the Capitol at
Washington is the great chess-board, is here played
in miniature. Burning Ambition finds its fuel here;
here Patriotism speaks boldly in the people's behalf,
and virtuous Economy demands retrenchment in the
emoluments of a lamplighter; here the Aldermen
range their senatorial dignity around the Mayor's
chair of state, and the Common Council feel that
they have liberty in charge. In short, human
weakness
and strength, passion and policy, Man's
tendencies
,
his aims and modes of pursuing them, his
individual
character, and his character in the mass, may
be studied almost as well here as on the theatre of
nations; and with this great advantage, that, he the lesson ever so disastrous, its Lilliputian scope still
makes the beholder smile.'
`Have you done much for the improvement of the
City?' asked the New Year. `Judging from what
little I have seen, it appears to be ancient and
timeworn
.'
`I have opened the Railroad,' said the elder Year,
`and half a dozen times a day, you will hear the bell
(which once summoned the Monks of a Spanish
Convent
to their devotions,) announcing the arrival or
departure of the cars. Old Salem now wears a much
livelier expression than when I first beheld her.
Strangers rumble down from Boston by hundreds at
a time. New faces throng in Essex street.
Railroad
hacks and omnibuses rattle over the pavements.
There is a perceptible increase of oyster-shops, and
other establishments for the accommodation of a
transitory
diurnal multitude. But a more important
change awaits the venerable town. An immense
accumulation of musty prejudices will be carried off
by the free circulation of society. A peculiarity of
character, of which the inhabitants themselves are
VOL. II. 10
hardly sensible, will be rubbed down and worn away
by the attrition of foreign substances. Much of the
result will be good; there will likewise be a few
things not so good. Whether for better or worse,
there will be a probable diminution of the moral
influence of wealth, and the sway of an aristocratic
class, which, from an era far beyond my memory,
has held firmer dominion here than in any other New
England town.'
The Old Year, having talked away nearly all of
her little remaining breath, now closed her Book of
Chronicles, and was about to take her departure.
But her sister detained her a while longer, by
inquiring
the contents of the huge band-box, which she was
so painfully lugging along with her.
`These are merely a few trifles,' replied the Old
Year, `which I have picked up in my rambles, and
am going to deposit, in the receptacle of things past
and forgotten. We sisterhood of Years never carry
any thing really valuable out of the world with us.
Here are patterns of most of the fashions which I
brought into vogue, and which have already lived out
their allotted term. You will supply their place, with
others equally ephemeral. Here, put up in little China
pots, like rouge, is a considerable lot of beautiful
women's
bloom, which the disconsolate fair ones owe
me a bitter grudge for stealing. I have likewise a
quantity of men's dark hair, instead of which, I have
left grey locks, or none at all. The tears of widows
and other afflicted mortals, who have received
comfort
during the last twelve months, are preserved in
some dozens of essence bottles, well corked and
sealed. I have several bundles of love-letters,
eloquently
breathing an eternity of burning passion,
which grew cold and perished, almost before the ink
was dry. Moreover, here is an assortment of many
thousand broken promises, and other broken ware,
all very light and packed into little space. The
heaviest articles in my possession are a large parcel
of disappointed hopes, which, a little while ago,
were buoyant enough to have inflated Mr. Lauriat's
balloon.'
`I have a fine lot of hopes here in my basket,'
remarked
the New Year. `They are a sweet-smelling
flower  a species of rose.'
`They soon lose their perfume,' replied the sombre
Old Year. `What else have you brought to insure a
welcome from the discontented race of mortals?'
`Why, to say the truth, little or nothing else,' said
her sister, with a smile  `save a few new Annuals
and Almanacs, and some New Year's gifts for the
children. But I heartily wish well to poor mortals,
and mean to do all I can for their improvement and
happiness.'
`It is a good resolution,' rejoined the Old Year;
`and, by the way, I have a plentiful assortment of
good resolutions, which have now grown so stale and
musty, that I am ashamed to carry them any further.
Only for fear that the City authorities would send
constable Mansfield, with a warrant after me, I should
toss them into the street at once. Many other
matters
go to make up the contents of my band-box; but
the whole lot would not fetch a single bid, even at an
auction of worn out furniture; and as they are worth
nothing either to you or any body else, I need not
trouble you with a longer catalogue.'
`And must I also pick up such worthless luggage
in my travels?' asked the New Year.
`Most certainly  and well, if you have no heavier
load to bear,' replied the other. `And now, my dear
sister, I must bid you farewell, earnestly advising and
exhorting you to expect no gratitude nor good will
from this peevish, unreasonable, inconsiderate, ill-
intending
and worse-behaving world. However warmly
its inhabitants may seem to welcome you, yet, do
what you may, and lavish on them what means of
happiness you please, they will still be complaining,
still craving what it is not in your power to give,
still looking forward to some other Year for the
accomplishment
of projects which ought never to have
been formed, and which, if successful, would only
provide new occasions of discontent. If these
ridiculous
people ever see any thing tolerable in you, it
will be after you are gone forever.'
`But I,' cried the fresh-hearted New Year, `I shall
try to leave men wiser than I find them. I will
offer them freely whatever good gifts Providence
permits me to distribute, and will tell them to be
thankful for what they have, and humbly hopeful for
more; and surely, if they are not absolute fools, they
will condescend to be happy, and will allow me to be
a happy Year. For my happiness must depend on
them.'
`Alas for you, then, my poor sister!' said the Old
Year, sighing, as she uplifted her burthen. `We
grand children of Time are born to trouble.
Happiness
,
they say, dwells in the mansions of Eternity;
but we can only lead mortals thither, step by step,
with reluctant murmurings, and ourselves must
perish
on the threshold. But hark! my task is done.'
The clock in the tall steeple of Dr. Emerson's
church struck twelve; there was a response from Dr.
Flint's, in the opposite quarter of the city; and while
the strokes were yet dropping into the air, the Old
Year either flitted or faded away  and not the
wisdom
and might of Angels, to say nothing of the
remorseful
yearnings of the millions who had used her
ill, could have prevailed with that departed Year to
return one step. But she, in the company of Time
and all her kindred, must hereafter hold a reckoning
with Mankind. So shall it be, likewise, with the
maidenly New Year, who, as the clock ceased to
strike, arose from the steps of the City Hall, and set
out rather timorously on her earthly course.
`A happy New Year!' cried a watchman, eyeing
her figure very questionably, but without the least
suspicion that he was addressing the New Year in
person.
`Thank you kindly!' said the New Year; and
she gave the watchman one of the roses of hope from
her basket. `May this flower keep a sweet smell,
long after I have bidden you good-by.'
Then she stept on more briskly through the silent
streets; and such as were awake at the moment,
heard her foot-fall, and said  `The New Year is
come!' Wherever there was a knot of midnight
roisterers, they quaffed her health. She sighed,
however
,
to perceive that the air was tainted  as the
atmosphere
of this world must continually be  with
the dying breaths of mortals who had lingered just
long enough for her to bury them. But there were
millions left alive, to rejoice at her coming; and so
she pursued her way with confidence, strewing
emblematic
flowers on the door-step of almost every
dwelling, which some persons will gather up and wear
in their bosoms, and others will trample under foot.
The Carrier Boy can only say further, that, early
this morning, she filled his basket with New Year's
Addresses, assuring him that the whole City, with our
new Mayor, and the Aldermen and Common Council
at its head, would make a general rush to secure
copies. Kind Patrons, will not you redeem the pledge
of the NEW YEAR?
SNOW FLAKES.
There
is snow in yonder cold gray sky of the
morning
!
and through the partially frosted
windowpanes
,
I love to watch the gradual beginning of the
storm. A few feathery flakes are scattered widely
through the air, and hover downward with uncertain
flight, now almost alighting on the earth, now whirled
again aloft into remote regions of the atmosphere.
These are not the big flakes, heavy with moisture,
which melt as they touch the ground, and are
portentous
of a soaking rain. It is to be, in good earnest,
a wintry storm. The two or three people, visible on
the side-walks, have an aspect of endurance, a
blue-nosed
,
frosty fortitude, which is evidently assumed in
anticipation of a comfortless and blustering day. By
nightfall, or at least before the sun sheds another
glimmering smile upon us, the street and our little
garden will be heaped with mountain snow-drifts.
The soil, already frozen for weeks past, is prepared
to sustain whatever burthen may be laid upon it;
and, to a northern eye, the landscape will lose its
melancholy bleakness and acquire a beauty of its
own, when Mother Earth, like her children, shall
have put on the fleecy garb of her winter's wear.
The cloud-spirits are slowly weaving her white
mantle
.
As yet, indeed, there is barely a rime like hoar
frost over the brown surface of the street; the
withered
green of the grass-plat is still discernible; and
the slated roofs of the houses do but begin to look
gray, instead of black. All the snow that has yet
fallen within the circumference of my view, were it
heaped up together, would hardly equal the hillock of
a grave. Thus gradually, by silent and stealthy
influences
,
are great changes wrought. These little
snow-particles, which the storm-spirit flings by
hand-fulls
through the air, will bury the great earth under
their accumulated mass, nor permit her to behold her
sister sky again for dreary months. We, likewise,
shall lose sight of our mother's familiar visage, and
must content ourselves with looking heavenward the
oftener.
Now, leaving the storm to do his appointed office,
let us sit down, pen in hand, by our fireside. Gloomy
as it may seem, there is an influence productive of
cheerfulness and favorable to imaginative thought, in
the atmosphere of a snowy day. The native of a
southern clime may woo the muse beneath the heavy
shade of summer foliage, reclining on banks of turf,
while the sound of singing birds and warbling
rivulets
chimes in with the music of his soul. In our
brief summer, I do not think, but only exist in the
vague enjoyment of a dream. My hour of
inspiration
if that hour ever comes  is when the green
log hisses upon the hearth, and the bright flame,
brighter for the gloom of the chamber, rustles high
up the chimney, and the coals drop tinkling down
among the growing heaps of ashes. When the
casement
rattles in the gust, and the snow-flakes or the
sleety rain-drops pelt hard against the window-panes,
then I spread out my sheet of paper, with the certainty
that thoughts and fancies will gleam forth upon it, like
stars at twilight, or like violets in May  perhaps to
fade as soon. However transitory their glow, they
at least shine amid the darksome shadow which the
clouds of the outward sky fling through the room.
Blessed, therefore, and reverently welcomed by me,
her true-born son, be New England's winter, which
makes us, one and all, the nurslings of the storm, and
sings a familiar lullaby even in the wildest shrick of
the December blast. Now look we forth again, and
see how much of his task the storm-spirit has done.
Slow and sure! He has the day, perchance the
week, before him, and may take his own time to
accomplish
Nature's burial in snow. A smooth mantle
is scarcely yet thrown over the withered grass-plat,
and the dry stalks of annuals still thrust themselves
through the white surface in all parts of the garden.
The leafless rose bushes stand shivering in a shallow
snow drift, looking, poor things! as disconsolate as if
they possessed a human consciousness of the dreary
scene. This is a sad time for the shrubs that do not
perish with the summer; they neither live nor die;
what they retain of life seems but the chilling sense
of death. Very sad are the flower-shrubs in
midwinter
!
The roofs of the houses are now all white,
save where the eddying wind has kept them bare at
the bleak corners. To discern the real intensity of
the storm, we must fix upon some distant object,  as
yonder spire,  and observe how the riotous gust
fights with the descending snow throughout the
intervening
space. Sometimes the entire prospect is
obscured
;
then, again, we have a distinct, but transient
glimpse of the tall steeple, like a giant's ghost; and
now the dense wreaths sweep between, as if demons
were flinging snow-drifts at each other, in mid-air.
Look next into the street, where we have an amusing
parallel to the combat of those fancied demons in the
upper regions. It is a snow-battle of school-boys.
What a pretty satire on war and military glory might
be written, in the form of a child's story, by
describing
the snow-ball fights of two rival schools, the
alternate
defeats and victories of each, and the final
triumph of one party, or perhaps of neither! What
pitched battles, worthy to be chanted in Homeric
strains! What storming of fortresses, built all of
massive snow-blocks! What feats of individual
prowess
,
and embodied onsets of martial enthusiasm! And
when some well-contested and decisive victory had
put a period to the war, both armies should unite to
build a lofty monument of snow upon the battle-field,
and crown it with the victor's statue, hewn of the same
frozen marble. In a few days or weeks thereafter,
the passer-by would observe a shapeless mound upon
the level common; and, unmindful of the famous
victory
,
would ask  `How came it there? Who reared
it? And what means it?' The shattered pedestal
of many a battle-monument has provoked these
questions
,
when none could answer.
Turn we again to the fireside, and sit musing there,
lending our ears to the wind, till perhaps it shall seem
like an articulate voice, and dictate wild and airy
matter for the pen. Would it might inspire me to
sketch out the personification of a New England
winter
!
And that idea, if I can seize the snow-wreathed
figures that flit before my fancy, shall be the theme
of the next page.
How does Winter herald his approach? By the
shrieking blast of latter autumn, which is Nature's cry
of lamentation, as the destroyer rushes among the
shivering groves where she has lingered, and scatters
the sear leaves upon the tempest. When that cry is
heard the people wrap themselves in cloaks, and shake
their heads disconsolately, saying  `Winter is at
hand!' Then the axe of the wood-cutter echoes
sharp and diligently in the forest,  then the
coal-merchants
rejoice, because each shriek of Nature in
her agony adds something to the price of coal per
ton  then the peat-smoke spreads its aromatic
fragrance
through the atmosphere. A few days more;
and at eventide, the children look out of the window,
and dimly perceive the flaunting of a snowy mantle
in the air. It is stern Winter's vesture. They crowd
around the hearth, and cling to their mother's gown,
or press between their father's knees, affrighted by
the hollow roaring voice, that bellows adown the wide
flue of the chimney. It is the voice of Winter; and
when parents and children hear it, they shudder and
exclaim  `Winter is come! Cold Winter has begun
his reign already!' Now, throughout New England,
each hearth becomes an altar, sending up the smoke
of a continued sacrifice to the immitigable deity who
tyrannizes over forest, country-side, and town. Wrapt
in his white mantle, his staff a huge icicle, his beard
and hair a wind-tossed snow-drift, he travels over the
land, in the midst of the northern blast; and woe to
the homeless wanderer whom he finds upon his path!
There he lies stark and stiff, a human shape of ice,
on the spot where Winter overtook him. On strides
the tyrant over the rushing rivers and broad lakes,
which turn to rock beneath his footsteps. His dreary
empire is established; all around stretches the
desolation
of the Pole. Yet not ungrateful he his New
England children  (for Winter is our sire, though
a stern and rough one)  not ungrateful even for
the severities, which have nourished our unyielding
strength of character. And let us thank him, too, for
the sleigh-rides, cheered by the music of merry bells
for the crackling and rustling hearth, when the
ruddy fire-light gleams on hardy Manhood and the
blooming cheek of Woman  for all the home-
enjoyments
,
and the kindred virtues, which flourish in a
frozen soil. Not that we grieve, when, after some
seven months of storm and bitter frost, Spring, in the
guise of a flower-crowned virgin, is seen driving away
the hoary despot, pelting him with violets by the
handful
,
and strewing green grass on the path behind him.
Often, ere he will give up his empire, old Winter
rushes fiercely back, and hurls a snow-drift at the
shrinking form of Spring; yet, step, by step, he is
compelled to retreat northward, and spends the
summer
month within the Arctic circle.
Such fantasies, intermixed among graver toils of
mind, have made the winter's day pass pleasantly.
Meanwhile, the storm has raged without abatement,
and now, as the brief afternoon declines, is tossing
denser volumes to and fro about the atmosphere.
On the window-sill, there is a layer of snow,
reaching
half way up the lowest pane of glass. The
garden
is one unbroken bed. Along the street are two
or three spots of uncovered earth, where the gust has
whirled away the snow, heaping it elsewhere to the
fence-tops, or piling huge banks against the doors of
houses. A solitary passenger is seen, now striding
mid-leg deep across a drift, now scudding over the
bare ground, while his cloak is swollen with the wind.
And now the jingling of bells, a sluggish sound,
responsive
to the horse's toilsome progress through the
unbroken drifts, announces the passage of a sleigh,
with a boy clinging behind, and ducking his head to
escape detection by the driver. Next comes a sledge,
laden with wood for some unthrifty housekeeper,
whom winter has surprised at a cold hearth. But
what dismal equipage now struggles along the uneven
street? A sable hearse, bestrewn with snow, is
hearing
a dead man through the storm to his frozen bed.
Oh, how dreary is a burial in winter, when the bosom
of Mother Earth has no warmth for her poor child!
Evening  the early eve of December  begins to
spread its deepening veil over the comfortless scene;
the fire-light gradually brightens, and throws my
flickering shadow upon the walls and ceiling of the
chamber; but still the storm rages and rattles against
the windows. Alas! I shiver, and think it time to be
disconsolate. But, taking a farewell glance at dead
nature in her shroud, I perceive a flock of snow-birds,
skimming lightsomely through the tempest, and flitting
from drift to drift, as sportively as swallows in the
delightful
prime of summer. Whence come they?
Where do they build their nests, and seek their food?
Why, having airy wings, do they not follow summer
around the earth, instead of making themselves the
playmates of the storm, and fluttering on the dreary
verge of the winter's eve? I know not whence they
come, nor why; yet my spirit has been cheered by
that wandering flock of snow-birds.
VOL. II. 11
THE SEVEN VAGABONDS.
Rambling
on foot in the spring of my life and the
summer of the year, I came one afternoon to a point
which gave me the choice of three directions. Straight
before me, the main road extended its dusty length to
Boston; on the left a branch went towards the sea,
and would have lengthened my journey a trifle, of
twenty or thirty miles; while, by the right hand path,
I might have gone over hills and lakes to Canada,
visiting in my way, the celebrated town of Stamford.
On a level spot of grass, at the foot of the guide post,
appeared an object, which though locomotive on a
different
principle, reminded me of Gulliver's portable
mansion among the Brobdignags. It was a huge
covered
wagon, or, more properly, a small house on
wheels, with a door on one side and a window shaded
by green blinds on the other. Two horses, munching
provender out of the baskets which muzzled them,
were fastened near the vehicle: a delectable sound
of music proceeded from the interior; and I
immediately
conjectured that this was some itinerant show,
halting at the confluence of the roads to intercept
such idle travellers as myself. A shower had long
been climbing up the western sky, and now hung so
blackly over my onward path that it was a point of
wisdom to seek shelter here.
`Halloo! Who stands guard here? Is the
doorkeeper
asleep?' cried I, approaching a ladder of two
or three steps which was let down from the wagon.
The music ceased at my summons, and there
appeared
at the door, not the sort of figure that I had
mentally assigned to the wandering show-man, but a
most respectable old personage, whom I was sorry to
have addressed in so free a style. He wore a
snuff-colored
coat and small clothes, with white top boots,
and exhibited the mild dignity of aspect and manner
which may often be noticed in aged schoolmasters,
and sometimes in deacons, selectmen, or other
potentates
of that kind. A small piece of silver was my
passport within his premises, where I found only one
other person, hereafter to be described.
`This is a dull day for business,' said the old
gentleman
,
as he ushered me in; `but I merely tarry
here to refresh the cattle, being bound for the
campmeeting
at Stamford.'
Perhaps the movable scene of this narrative is still
peregrinating New England, and may enable the
reader to test the accuracy of my description. The
spectacle, for I will not use the unworthy term of
puppet-show, consisted of a multitude of little people
assembled on a miniature stage. Among them were
artisans of every kind, in the attitudes of their toil,
and a group of fair ladies and gay gentlemen
standing
ready for the dance; a company of foot soldiers
formed a line across the stage, looking stern, grim,
and terrible enough, to make it a pleasant
consideration
that they were but three inches high; and
conspicuous
above the whole was seen a Merry Andrew,
in the pointed cap and motley coat of his profession.
All the inhabitants of this mimic world were
motionless
,
like the figures in a picture, or like that people
who one moment were alive in the midst of their
business and delights, and the next were transformed
to statues, preserving an eternal semblance of labor
that was ended, and pleasure that could be felt no
more. Anon, however, the old gentleman turned
the handle of a barrel organ, the first note of which
produced a most enlivening effect upon the figures,
and awoke them all to their proper occupations and
amusements. By the self-same impulse the tailor
plied his needle, the blacksmith's hammer descended
upon the anvil, and the dancers whirled away on
feathery tiptoes; the company of soldiers broke into
platoons, retreated from the stage, and were
succeeded
by a troop of horse, who came prancing onward
with such a sound of trumpets and trampling of hoofs,
as might have startled Don Quixote himself; while
an old toper, of inveterate ill-habits, uplifted his black
bottle and took off a hearty swig. Meantime the
Merry Andrew began to caper and turn somersets,
shaking his sides, nodding his head, and winking his
eyes in as life-like a manner as if he were ridiculing
the nonsense of all human affairs, and making fun of
the whole multitude beneath him. At length the old
magician (for I compared the show-man to Prospero,
entertaining his guests with a masque of shadows,)
paused that I might give utterance to my wonder.
`What an admirable piece of work is this!'
exclaimed
I, lifting up my hands in astonishment.
Indeed, I liked the spectacle, and was tickled with
the old man's gravity as he presided at it, for I had
none of that foolish wisdom which reproves every
occupation that is not useful in this world of vanities.
If there be a faculty which I possess more perfectly
than most men, it is that of throwing myself mentally
into situations foreign to my own, and detecting, with
a cheerful eye, the desirable circumstances of each.
I could have envied the life of this grey headed
showman
,
spent as it had been in a course of safe and
pleasurable adventure, in driving his huge vehicle
sometimes through the sands of Cape Cod, and
sometimes
over the rough forest roads of the north and
east, and halting now on the green before a village
meeting-house, and now in a paved square of the
metropolis. How often must his heart have been
gladdened by the delight of children, as they viewed
these animated figures! or his pride indulged, by
haranguing learnedly to grown men on the
mechanical
powers which produced such wonderful effects!
or his gallantry brought into play (for this is an
attribute
which such grave men do not lack,) by the visits
of pretty maidens! And then with how fresh a
feeling
must he return, at intervals, to his own peculiar
home!
`I would I were assured of as happy a life as his,'
thought I.
Though the show-man's wagon might have
accommodated
fifteen or twenty spectators, it now contained
only himself and me, and a third person at whom I
threw a glance on entering. He was a neat and trim
young man of two or three and twenty; his drab hat,
and green frock coat with velvet collar, were smart,
though no longer new; while a pair of green
spectacles
,
that seemed needless to his brisk little eyes, gave
him something of a scholar-like and literary air.
After allowing me a sufficient time to inspect the
puppets, he advanced with a bow, and drew my
attention
to some books in a corner of the wagon. These
he forthwith began to extol, with an amazing
volubility
of well-sounding words, and an ingenuity of
praise that won him my heart, as being myself one
of the most merciful of critics. Indeed his stock
required
some considerable powers of commendation
in the salesman; there were several ancient friends
of mine, the novels of those happy days when my
affections wavered between the Scottish Chiefs and
Thomas Thumb; besides a few of later date, whose
merits had not been acknowledged by the public. I
was glad to find that dear little venerable volume, the
New England Primer, looking as antique as ever,
though in its thousandth new edition; a bundle of
superannuated gilt picture books made such a child
of me, that, partly for the glittering covers, and
partly for the fairy tales within, I bought the whole;
and an assortment of ballads and popular theatrical
songs drew largely on my purse. To balance these
expenditures, I meddled neither with sermons, nor
science, nor morality, though volumes of each were
there; nor with a Life of Franklin in the coarsest of
paper, but so showily bound that it was emblematical
of the Doctor himself, in the court dress which he
refused
to wear at Paris; nor with Webster's spelling
book, nor some of Byron's minor poems, nor half a
dozen little testaments at twenty-five cents each.
Thus far the collection might have been swept from
some great book store, or picked up at an evening
auction room; but there was one small blue covered
pamphlet, which the pedler handed me with so
peculiar
an air, that I purchased it immediately at his own
price; and then, for the first time, the thought struck
me, that I had spoken face to face with the veritable
author of a printed book. The literary man now
evinced a great kindness for me, and I ventured to
inquire which way he was travelling.
`Oh,' said he, `I keep company with this old
gentleman
here, and we are moving now towards the
camp-meeting at Stamford.'
He then explained to me, that for the present
season
he had rented a corner of the wagon as a book
store, which, as he wittily observed, was a true
Circulating
Library, since there were few parts of the
country where it had not gone its rounds. I approved
of the plan exceedingly, and began to sum up within
my mind the many uncommon felicities in the life of
a book pedler, especially when his character
resembled
that of the individual before me. At a high
rate was to be reckoned the daily and hourly
enjoyment
of such interviews as the present, in which he
seized upon the admiration of a passing stranger, and
made him aware that a man of literary taste, and
even of literary achievement, was travelling the
country
in a show-man's wagon. A more valuable, yet
not infrequent triumph, might be won in his
conversations
with some elderly clergyman, long vegetating in
a rocky, woody, watery back settlement of New
England
,
who as he recruited his library from the pedler's
stock of sermons, would exhort him to seek a college
education and become the first scholar in his class.
Sweeter and prouder yet would be his sensations,
when, talking poetry while he sold spelling books, he
should charm the mind, and haply touch the heart of
a fair country school mistress, herself an unhonored
poetess, a wearer of blue stockings which none but
himself took pains to look at. But the scene of his
completest glory would be when the wagon had halted
for the night, and his stock of books was transferred
to some crowded bar room. Then would he
recommend
to the multifarious company, whether traveller
from the city, or teamster from the hills, or
neighboring
squire, or the landlord himself, or his loutish
hostler, works suited to each particular taste and
capacity
;
proving, all the while, by acute criticism and
profound remark, that the lore in his books was even
exceeded by that in his brain.
Thus happily would he traverse the land;
sometimes
a herald before the march of Mind;
sometimes
walking arm in arm with awful Literature; and
reaping everywhere a harvest of real and sensible
popularity, which the secluded book worms, by whose
toil he lived, could never hope for.
`If ever I meddle with literature,' thought I, fixing
myself in adamantine resolution, `it shall be as a
travelling bookseller.'
Though it was still mid-afternoon, the air had now
grown dark about us, and a few drops of rain came
down upon the roof of our vehicle, pattering like the
feet of birds that had flown thither to rest. A sound
of pleasant voices made us listen, and there soon
appeared
halfway up the ladder the pretty person of a
young damsel, whose rosy face was so cheerful, that
even amid the gloomy light it seemed as if the
sunbeams
were peeping under her bonnet. We next
saw the dark and handsome features of a young man,
who with easier gallantry than might have been
expected
in the heart of Yankee-land, was assisting her
into the wagon. It became immediately evident to
us, when the two strangers stood within the door, that
they were of a profession kindred to those of my
companions; and I was delighted with the more than
hospitable, the even paternal kindness, of the old
show-man's manner, as he welcomed them; while
the man of literature hastened to lead the merry-eyed
girl to a seat on the long bench.
`You are housed but just in time, my young
friends,' said the master of the wagon. `The sky
would have been down upon you within five minutes.'
The young man's reply marked him as a foreigner,
not by any variation from the idiom and accent of
good English, but because he spoke with more
caution
and accuracy, than if perfectly familiar with the
language.
`We knew that a shower was hanging over us,'
said he, `and consulted whether it were best to enter
the house on the top of yonder hill, but seeing your
wagon in the road '
`We agreed to come hither,' interrupted the girl,
with a smile, `because we should be more at home in
a wandering house like this.'
I, meanwhile, with many a wild and undetermined
fantasy, was narrowly inspecting these two doves that
had flown into our ark. The young man tall, agile,
and athletic, wore a mass of black shining curls
clustering
round a dark and vivacious countenance, which,
if it had not greater expression, was at least more
active
,
and attracted readier notice, than the quiet faces
of our countrymen. At his first appearance, he had
been laden with a neat mahogany box, of about two
feet square, but very light in proportion to its size,
which he had immediately unstrapped from his
shoulders
and deposited on the floor of the wagon.
The girl had nearly as fair a complexion as our
own beauties, and a brighter one than most of them;
the lightness of her figure, which seemed
calculated
to traverse the whole world without weariness,
suited well with the glowing cheerfulness of her face;
and her gay attire combining the rainbow hues of
crimson, green, and a deep orange, was as proper to
her lightsome aspect as if she had been born in it.
This gay stranger was appropriately burdened with
that mirth-inspiring instrument, the fiddle, which her
companion took from her hands, and shortly began
the process of tuning. Neither of us  the previous
company of the wagon  needed to inquire their
trade; for this could be no mystery to frequenters of
brigade musters, ordinations, cattle shows,
commencements
,
and other festal meetings in our sober land;
and there is a dear friend of mine, who will smile
when this page recalls to his memory a chivalrous
deed performed by us, in rescuing the show box of
such a couple from a mob of great double-fisted
countrymen
.
`Come,' said I to the damsel of gay attire, `shall
we visit all the wonders of the world together?'
She understood the metaphor at once; though
indeed
it would not much have troubled me, if she had
assented to the literal meaning of my words. The
mahogany box was placed in a proper position, and I
peeped in through its small round magnifying
window
,
while the girl sat by my side, and gave short
descriptive sketches, as one after another the pictures
were unfolded to my view. We visited together, at
least our imaginations did, full many a famous city, in
the streets of which I had long yearned to tread;
once, I remember, we were in the harbor of
Barcelona
,
gazing townwards; next, she bore me through
the air to Sicily, and bade me look up at blazing
tna; then we took wing to Venice, and sat in a
gondola beneath the arch of the Rialto; and anon she
set me down among the thronged spectators at the
coronation of Napoleon. But there was one scene,
its locality she could not tell, which charmed my
attention
longer than all those gorgeous palaces and
churches, because the fancy haunted me, that I
myself
,
the preceding summer, had beheld just such an
humble meeting-house, in just such a pine-surrounded
nook, among our own green mountains. All these
pictures were tolerably executed, though far inferior
to the girl's touches of description; nor was it easy
to comprehend, how in so few sentences, and these,
as I supposed, in a language foreign to her, she
contrived
to present an airy copy of each varied scene.
When we had travelled through the vast extent of the
mahogany box, I looked into my guide's face.
`Where are you going, my pretty maid?' inquired
I, in the words of an old song.
`Ah,' said the gay damsel, `you might as well ask
where the summer wind is going. We are
wanderers
here, and there, and every where. Wherever
there is mirth, our merry hearts are drawn to it.
Today
,
indeed, the people have told us of a great frolic
and festival in these parts; so perhaps we may be
needed at what you call the camp meeting at
Stamford
.'
Then in my happy youth, and while her pleasant
voice yet sounded in my ears, I sighed; for none but
myself, I thought, should have been her companion in
a life which seemed to realize my own wild fancies,
cherished all through visionary boyhood to that hour.
To these two strangers, the world was in its golden
age, not that indeed it was less dark and sad than ever,
but because its weariness and sorrow had no
community
with their ethereal nature. Wherever they
might appear in their pilgrimage of bliss, Youth
would echo back their gladness, care-stricken
Maturity
would rest a moment from its toil, and Age,
tottering
among the graves, would smile in withered joy
for their sakes. The lonely cot, the narrow and
gloomy street, the sombre shade, would catch a
passing
gleam like that now shining on ourselves, as these
bright spirits wandered by. Blessed pair, whose
happy home was throughout all the earth! I looked
at my shoulders, and thought them broad enough to
sustain those pictured towns and mountains; mine,
too, was an elastic foot, as tireless as the wing of the
bird of Paradise; mine was then an untroubled
heart, that would have gone singing on its delightful
way.
`Oh, maiden!' said I aloud, `why did you not
come hither alone?'
While the merry girl and myself were busy with
the show-box, the unceasing rain had driven another
wayfarer into the wagon. He seemed pretty nearly
of the old show-man's age, but much smaller, leaner,
and more withered than he, and less respectably clad
in a patched suit of gray; withal, he had a thin,
shrewd countenance, and a pair of diminutive gray
eyes, which peeped rather too keenly out of their
puckered sockets. This old fellow had been joking
with the show-man, in a manner which intimated
previous
acquaintance; but perceiving that the damsel
and I had terminated our affairs, he drew forth a folded
document and presented it to me. As I had
anticipated
,
it proved to be a circular, written in a very
fair and legible hand, and signed by several
distinguished
gentlemen whom I had never heard of,
stating
that the bearer had encountered every variety of
misfortune, and recommending him to the notice of
all charitable people. Previous disbursements had
left me no more than a five dollar bill, out of which,
however, I offered to make the beggar a donation,
provided he would give me change for it. The
object
of my beneficence looked keenly in my face, and
discerned that I had none of that abominable spirit,
characteristic though it be, of a full-blooded Yankee,
which takes pleasure in detecting every little
harmless
piece of knavery.
`Why, perhaps,' said the ragged old mendicant, `if
the bank is in good standing, I can't say but I may
have enough about me to change your bill.'
`It is a bill of the Suffolk Bank,' said I, `and better
than the specie.'
As the beggar had nothing to object, he now
produced
a small buff leather bag, tied up carefully with
a shoe-string. When this was opened, there appeared
a very comfortable treasure of silver coins, of all sorts
and sizes, and I even fancied that I saw, gleaming
among them, the golden plumage of that rare bird in
our currency, the American Eagle. In this precious
heap was my bank note deposited, the rate of
exchange
being considerably against me. His wants
being thus relieved, the destitute man pulled out of
his pocket an old pack of greasy cards, which had
probably contributed to fill the buff leather bag, in
more ways than one.
`Come,' said he, `I spy a rare fortune in your face,
and for twenty-five cents more, I 'll tell you what
it is.'
I never refuse to take a glimpse into futurity; so
after shuffling the cards, and when the fair damsel
had cut them, I dealt a portion to the prophetic
beggar
.
Like others of his profession, before predicting
the shadowy events that were moving on to meet me,
he gave proof of his preternatural science, by
describing
scenes through which I had already passed. Here
let me have credit for a sober fact. When the old
man had read a page in his book of fate, he bent his
keen gray eyes on mine, and proceeded to relate, in
all its minute particulars, what was then the most
singular
event of my life. It was one which I had no
purpose to disclose, till the general unfolding of all
secrets; nor would it be a much stranger instance of
inscrutable knowledge, or fortunate conjecture, if the
beggar were to meet me in the street to-day, and
repeat
,
word for word, the page which I have here
written
.
The fortune-teller, after predicting a destiny
which time seems loth to make good, put up his cards,
secreted his treasure bag, and began to converse with
the other occupants of the wagon.
`Well, old friend,' said the show-man, `you have
not yet told us which way your face is turned this
afternoon
.'
`I am taking a trip northward, this warm weather,'
VOL. II. 12
replied the conjurer, `across the Connecticut first, and
then up through Vermont, and may be into Canada
before the fall. But I must stop and see the
breaking
up of the camp-meeting at Stamford.'
I began to think that all the vagrants in New
England
were converging to the camp-meeting, and had
made this wagon their rendezvous by the way. The
show-man now proposed, that, when the shower was
over, they should pursue the road to Stamford
together
,
it being sometimes the policy of these
people
to form a sort of league and confederacy.
`And the young lady too,' observed the gallant
bibliopolist
,
bowing to her profoundly, `and this foreign
gentleman, as I understand, are on a jaunt of
pleasure
to the same spot. It would add incalculably to
my own enjoyment, and I presume to that of my
colleague
and his friend, if they could be prevailed upon
to join our party.'
This arrangement met with approbation on all
hands, nor were any of those concerned more
sensible
of its advantages than myself, who had no title to
be included in it. Having already satisfied myself
as to the several modes in which the four others
attained
felicity, I next set my mind at work to discover
what enjoyments were peculiar to the old `
Straggler
,'
as the people of the country would have termed
the wandering mendicant and prophet. As he
pretended
to familiarity with the Devil, so I fancied that
he was fitted to pursue and take delight in his way of
life, by possessing some of the mental and moral
characteristics, the lighter and more comic ones, of
the Devil in popular stories. Among them might be
reckoned a love of deception for its own sake, a
shrewd eye and keen relish for human weakness and
ridiculous infirmity, and the talent of petty fraud.
Thus to this old man there would be pleasure even in
the consciousness so insupportable to some minds,
that his whole life was a cheat upon the world, and
that so far as he was concerned with the public, his
little cunning had the upper hand of its united
wisdom
.
Every day would furnish him with a
succession
of minute and pungent triumphs; as when, for
instance, his importunity wrung a pittance out of the
heart of a miser, or when my silly good nature
transferred
a part of my slender purse to his plump leather
bag; or when some ostentatious gentleman should
throw a coin to the ragged beggar who was richer
than himself; or when, though he would not always
be so decidedly diabolical, his pretended wants should
make him a sharer in the scanty living of real
indigence
.
And then what an inexhaustible field of
enjoyment, both as enabling him to discern so much
folly and achieve such quantities of minor mischief,
was opened to his sneering spirit by his pretensions to
prophetic knowledge.
All this was a sort of happiness which I could
conceive of, though I had little sympathy with it.
Perhaps had I been then inclined to admit it, I might
have found that the roving life was more proper to
him than to either of his companions; for Satan, to
whom I had compared the poor man, has
delighted
,
ever since the time of Job, in `wandering up and
down upon the earth;' and indeed a crafty disposition,
which operates not in deep laid plans, but in
disconnected
tricks, could not have an adequate scope,
unless
naturally impelled to a continual change of scene
and society. My reflections were here interrupted.
`Another visiter!' exclaimed the old show-man.
The door of the wagon had been closed against
the tempest, which was roaring and blustering with
prodigious fury and commotion, and beating violently
against our shelter, as if it claimed all those homeless
people for its lawful prey, while we, caring little for
the displeasure of the elements, sat comfortably
talking
.
There was now an attempt to open the door,
succeeded by a voice, uttering some strange,
unintelligible
gibberish, which my companions mistook for
Greek, and I suspected to be thieves' Latin.
However
,
the show-man stept forward, and gave
admittance
to a figure which made me imagine, either that
our wagon had rolled back two hundred years into
past ages, or that the forest and its old inhabitants had
sprung up around us by enchantment.
It was a red Indian, armed with his bow and arrow.
His dress was a sort of cap, adorned with a single
feather of some wild bird, and a frock of blue cotton,
girded tight about him; on his breast, like orders of
knighthood, hung a crescent and a circle, and other
ornaments of silver; while a small crucifix betokened
that our Father the Pope had interposed between the
Indian and the Great Spirit, whom he had worshiped
in his simplicity. This son of the wilderness, and
pilgrim of the storm, took his place silently in the
midst of us. When the first surprise was over, I
rightly conjectured him to be one of the Penobscot
tribe, parties of which I had often seen, in their
summer
excursions down our Eastern rivers. There
they paddle their birch canoes among the coasting
schooners, and build their wigwam beside some
roaring
mill-dam, and drive a little trade in basket work
where their fathers hunted deer. Our new visiter
was probably wandering through the country towards
Boston, subsisting on the careless charity of the
people
,
while he turned his archery to profitable account
by shooting at cents, which were to be the prize of
his successful aim.
The Indian had not long been seated, ere our merry
damsel sought to draw him into conversation. She,
indeed, seemed all made up of sunshine in the month
of May; for there was nothing so dark and dismal
that her pleasant mind could not cast a glow over it;
and the wild man, like a fir tree in his native forest,
soon began to brighten into a sort of sombre
cheerfulness
.
At length, she inquired whether his journey
had any particular end or purpose.
`I go shoot at the camp-meeting at Stamford,'
replied
the Indian.
`And here are five more,' said the girl, `all aiming
at the camp-meeting too. You shall be one of us,
for we travel with light hearts; and as for me, I sing
merry songs, and tell merry tales, and am full of
merry thoughts, and I dance merrily along the road,
so that there is never any sadness among them that
keep me company. But, oh, you would find it
very dull indeed, to go all the way to Stamford
alone!'
My ideas of the aboriginal character led me to fear
that the Indian would prefer his own solitary musings,
to the gay society thus offered him; on the contrary,
the girl's proposal met with immediate acceptance,
and seemed to animate him with a misty expectation
of enjoyment. I now gave myself up to a course of
thought which, whether it flowed naturally from this
combination of events, or was drawn forth by a
wayward
fancy, caused my mind to thrill as if I were
listening
to deep music. I saw mankind, in this weary old
age of the world, either enduring a sluggish existence
amid the smoke and dust of cities, or, if they breathed
a purer air, still lying down at night with no hope but
to wear out to-morrow, and all the to-morrows which
make up life, among the same dull scenes and in the
same wretched toil, that had darkened the sunshine
of to-day. But there were some, full of the
primeval
instinct, who preserved the freshness of youth to
their latest years by the continual excitement of new
objects, new pursuits, and new associates; and cared
little, though their birth-place might have been here
in New England, if the grave should close over them
in Central Asia. Fate was summoning a parliament
of these free spirits; unconscious of the impulse
which directed them to a common centre, they had
come hither from far and near; and last of all,
appeared
the representative of those mighty vagrants,
who had chased the deer during thousands of years,
and were chasing it now in the Spirit Land.
Wandering
down through the waste of ages, the woods
had vanished around his path; his arm had lost
somewhat
of its strength, his foot of its fleetness, his mien
of its wild regality, his heart and mind of their
savage
virtue and uncultured force; but here,
untamable
to the routine of artificial life, roving now along
the dusty road, as of old over the forest leaves, here
was the Indian still.
`Well,' said the old show-man, in the midst of my
meditations, `here is an honest company of us  one,
two, three, four, five, six  all going to the
campmeeting
at Stamford. Now, hoping no offence, I
should like to know where this young gentleman may
be going?'
I started. How came I among these wanderers?
The free mind, that preferred its own folly to
another's
wisdom; the open spirit, that found
companions
every where; above all, the restless impulse,
that had so often made me wretched in the midst of
enjoyments; these were my claims to be of their
society.
`My friends!' cried I, stepping into the centre of
the wagon, `I am going with you to the camp-
meeting
at Stamford.'
`But in what capacity?' asked the old show-man,
after a moment's silence. `All of us here can get
our bread in some creditable way. Every honest
man should have his livelihood. You, sir, as I take
it, are a mere strolling gentleman.'
I proceeded to inform the company, that, when
Nature gave me a propensity to their way of life,
she had not left me altogether destitute of
qualifications
for it; though I could not deny that my
talent
was less respectable, and might be less profitable,
than the meanest of theirs. My design, in short, was
to imitate the story-tellers of whom Oriental
travellers
have told us, and become an itinerant novelist,
reciting my own extemporaneous fictions to such
audiences
as I could collect.
`Either this,' said I, `is my vocation, or I have
been born in vain.'
The fortune-teller, with a sly wink to the company,
proposed to take me as an apprentice to one or other
of his professions, either of which, undoubtedly would
have given full scope to whatever inventive talent I
might possess. The bibliopolist spoke a few words
in opposition to my plan, influenced partly, I suspect,
by the jealousy of authorship, and partly by an
apprehension
that the
viv voce
practice would become
general among novelists, to the infinite detriment of
the book trade. Dreading a rejection, I solicited the
interest of the merry damsel.
`Mirth,' cried I, most aptly appropriating the words
of L'Allegro, `to thee I sue! Mirth, admit me of
thy crew!'
`Let us indulge the poor youth,' said Mirth, with a
kindness which made me love her dearly, though I
was no such coxcomb as to misinterpret her motives.
`I have espied much promise in him. True, a
shadow sometimes flits across his brow, but the
sunshine
is sure to follow in a moment. He is never
guilty of a sad thought, but a merry one is twin born
with it. We will take him with us; and you shall
see that he will set us all a laughing before we reach
the camp-meeting at Stamford.'
Her voice silenced the scruples of the rest, and
gained me admittance into the league; according to
the terms of which, without a community of goods or
profits, we were to lend each other all the aid, and
avert all the harm, that might be in our power. This
affair settled, a marvelous jollity entered into the
whole tribe of us, manifesting itself characteristically
in each individual. The old show-man, sitting down
to his barrel organ, stirred up the souls of the pigmy
people with one of the quickest tunes in the music
book; tailors, blacksmiths, gentlemen, and ladies,
all seemed to share in the spirit of the occasion; and
the Merry Andrew played his part more facetiously
than ever, nodding and winking particularly at me.
The young foreigner flourished his fiddle bow with a
master's hand, and gave an inspiring echo to the
show-man's melody. The bookish man and the
merry damsel started up simultaneously to dance;
the former enacting the double shuffle in a style
which every body must have witnessed, ere Election
week was blotted out of time; while the girl,
setting
her arms akimbo with both hands at her slim
waist, displayed such light rapidity of foot, and
harmony
of varying attitude and motion, that I could not
conceive how she ever was to stop; imagining, at the
moment, that Nature had made her, as the old
showman
had made his puppets, for no earthly purpose but
to dance jigs. The Indian bellowed forth a
succession
of most hideous outcries, somewhat affrighting
us, till we interpreted them as the war song, with
which, in imitation of his ancestors, he was prefacing
the assault on Stamford. The conjurer, meanwhile,
sat demurely in a corner, extracting a sly enjoyment
from the whole scene, and, like the facetious Merry
Andrew, directing his queer glance particularly at
me.
As for myself, with great exhilaration of fancy, I
began to arrange and color the incidents of a tale,
wherewith I proposed to amuse an audience that very
evening; for I saw that my associates were a little
ashamed of me, and that no time was to be lost in
obtaining a public acknowledgment of my abilities.
`Come, fellow-laborers,' at last said the old
showman
,
whom we had elected President; `the shower
is over, and we must be doing our duty by these poor
souls at Stamford.'
`We 'll come among them in procession, with
music
and dancing,' cried the merry damsel.
Accordingly, for it must be understood that our
pilgrimage was to be performed on foot, we sallied
joyously out of the wagon, each of us, even the old
gentleman in his white top boots, giving a great skip
as we came down the ladder. Above our heads there
was such a glory of sunshine and splendor of clouds,
and such brightness of verdure below, that, as I
modestly
remarked at the time, Nature seemed to have
washed her face, and put on the best of her jewelry
and a fresh green gown, in honor of our
confederation
.
Casting our eyes northward, we beheld a
horseman
approaching leisurely, and splashing through the
little puddles on the Stamford road. Onward he
came, sticking up in his saddle with rigid
perpendicularity
,
a tall, thin figure in rusty black, whom the
show-man and the conjurer shortly recognised to be,
what his aspect sufficiently indicated, a travelling
preacher of great fame among the Methodists. What
puzzled us was the fact, that his face appeared turned
from, instead of to, the camp-meeting at Stamford.
However, as this new votary of the wandering life
drew near the little green space, where the guide post
and our wagon were situated, my six fellow vagabonds
and myself rushed forward and surrounded him,
crying
out with united voices
`What news, what news, from the camp-meeting
at Stamford?'
The missionary looked down, in surprise, at as
singular
a knot of people as could have been selected
from all his heterogeneous auditors. Indeed,
considering
that we might all be classified under the
general
head of Vagabond, there was great diversity of
character among the grave old show-man, the sly,
prophetic
beggar, the fiddling foreigner and his merry
damsel, the smart bibliopolist, the sombre Indian, and
myself, the itinerant novelist, a slender youth of
eighteen. I even fancied, that a smile was
endeavoring
to disturb the iron gravity of the preacher's mouth.
`Good people,' answered he, `the camp-meeting is
broke up.'
So saying, the Methodist minister switched his steed,
and rode westward. Our union being thus nullified,
by the removal of its object, we were sundered at
once to the four winds of Heaven. The fortune-
teller
,
giving a nod to all, and a peculiar wink to me,
departed on his northern tour, chuckling within
himself
as he took the Stamford road. The old
showman
and his literary coadjutor were already tackling
their horses to the wagon, with a design to
peregrinate
southwest along the sea coast. The foreigner
and the merry damsel took their laughing leave, and
pursued the eastern road, which I had that day
trodden
;
as they passed away, the young man played a
lively strain, and the girl's happy spirit broke into
a dance; and thus, dissolving, as it were, into
sunbeams
and gay music, that pleasant pair departed from
my view. Finally, with a pensive shadow thrown
across my mind, yet emulous of the light philosophy
of my late companions, I joined myself to the
Penobscot
Indian, and set forth towards the distant city.
THE WHITE OLD MAID.
The
moonbeams came through two deep and
narrow
windows, and showed a spacious chamber, richly
furnished in an antique fashion. From one lattice,
the shadow of the diamond panes was thrown upon
the floor; the ghostly light, through the other, slept
upon a bed, falling between the heavy silken curtains,
and illuminating the face of a young man. But, how
quietly the slumberer lay! how pale his features! and
how like a shroud the sheet was wound about his
frame! Yes; it was a corpse, in its burial clothes.
Suddenly, the fixed features seemed to move, with
dark emotion. Strange fantasy! It was but the
shadow of the fringed curtain, waving betwixt the dead
face and the moonlight, as the door of the chamber
opened, and a girl stole softly to the bedside. Was
there delusion in the moonbeams, or did her gesture
and her eye betray a gleam of triumph, as she bent
over the pale corpse  pale as itself  and pressed
her living lips to the cold ones of the dead? As she
drew back from that long kiss, her features writhed,
as if a proud heart were fighting with its anguish.
Again it seemed that the features of the corpse had
moved, responsive to her own. Still an illusion!
The silken curtain had waved, a second time, betwixt
the dead face and the moonlight, as another fair
young girl unclosed the door, and glided, ghost-like,
to the bedside. There the two maidens stood, both
beautiful, with the pale beauty of the dead between
them. But she, who had first entered, was proud and
stately; and the other, a soft and fragile thing.
`Away!' cried the lofty one. `Thou hadst him
living! The dead is mine!'
`Thine!' returned the other, shuddering. `Well
hast thou spoken! The dead is thine!'
The proud girl started, and stared into her face,
with a ghastly look. But a wild and mournful
expression
passed across the features of the gentle one;
and, weak and helpless, she sank down on the bed,
her head pillowed beside that of the corpse, and her
hair mingling with his dark locks. A creature of
hope and joy, the first draught of sorrow had
bewildered
her.
`Edith!' cried her rival.
Edith groaned, as with a sudden compression of
the heart; and removing her cheek from the dead
youth's pillow, she stood upright, fearfully
encountering
the eyes of the lofty girl.
`Wilt thou betray me?' said the latter, calmly.
`Till the dead bid me speak, I will be silent,'
answered
VOL. II. 13
Edith. `Leave us alone together! Go, and
live many years, and then return, and tell me of thy
life. He, too, will be here! Then, if thou tellest of
sufferings more than death, we will both forgive thee.'
`And what shall be the token?' asked the proud
girl, as if her heart acknowledged a meaning in these
wild words.
`This lock of hair,' said Edith, lifting one of the
dark, clustering curls, that lay heavily on the dead
man's brow.
The two maidens joined their hands over the bosom
of the corpse, and appointed a day and hour, far, far
in time to come, for their next meeting in that
chamber
.
The statelier girl gave one deep look at the
motionless countenance, and departed  yet turned
again and trembled, ere she closed the door, almost
believing that her dead lover frowned upon her. And
Edith, too! Was not her white form fading into the
moonlight? Scorning her own weakness, she went
forth, and perceived that a negro slave was waiting in
the passage, with a wax-light, which he held between
her face and his own, and regarded her, as she
thought, with an ugly expression of merriment.
Lifting
his torch on high, the slave lighted her down the
staircase, and undid the portal of the mansion. The
young clergyman of the town had just ascended the
steps, and bowing to the lady, passed in without a
word.
Years, many years rolled on; the world seemed
new again, so much older was it grown, since the
night when those pale girls had clasped their hands
across the bosom of the corpse. In the interval, a
lonely woman had passed from youth to extreme age,
and was known by all the town, as the `Old Maid in
the Winding-Sheet.' A taint of insanity had affected
her whole life, but so quiet, sad, and gentle, so utterly
free from violence, that she was suffered to pursue
her harmless fantasies, unmolested by the world, with
whose business or pleasures she had nought to do.
She dwelt alone, and never came into the daylight,
except to follow funerals. Whenever a corpse was
borne along the street, in sunshine, rain, or snow,
whether a pompous train, of the rich and proud,
thronged after it, or few and humble were the
mourners
,
behind them came the lonely woman, in a long,
white garment, which the people called her shroud.
She took no place among the kindred or the friends,
but stood at the door to hear the funeral prayer, and
walked in the rear of the procession, as one whose
earthly charge it was to haunt the house of
mourning
,
and be the shadow of affliction, and see that the
dead were duly buried. So long had this been her
custom, that the inhabitants of the town deemed her
a part of every funeral, as much as the coffin-pall,
or the very corpse itself, and augured ill of the
sinner's
destiny, unless the `Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet
'
came gliding, like a ghost, behind. Once, it
is said, she affrighted a bridal party, with her pale
presence, appearing suddenly in the illuminated hall,
just as the priest was uniting a false maid to a wealthy
man, before her lover had been dead a year. Evil
was the omen to that marriage! Sometimes she stole
forth by moonlight, and visited the graves of
venerable
Integrity, and wedded Love, and virgin Innocence,
and every spot where the ashes of a kind and
faithful
heart were mouldering. Over the hillocks of
those favored dead, would she stretch out her arms,
with a gesture, as if she were scattering seeds; and
many believed that she brought them from the garden
of Paradise; for the graves, which she had visited,
were green beneath the snow, and covered with
sweet flowers from April to November. Her blessing
was better than a holy verse upon the tomb-stone.
Thus wore away her long, sad, peaceful, and fantastic
life, till few were so old as she, and the people of later
generations wondered how the dead had ever been
buried, or mourners had endured their grief, without
the `Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.'
Still, years went on, and still she followed funerals,
and was not yet summoned to her own festival of
death. One afternoon, the great street of the town
was all alive with business and bustle, though the sun
now gilded only the upper half of the church-spire,
having left the house-tops and loftiest trees in shadow.
The scene was cheerful and animated, in spite of the
sombre shade between the high brick buildings. Here
were pompous merchants, in white wigs and laced
velvet; the bronzed faces of sea-captains; the foreign
garb and air of Spanish creoles; and the disdainful
port of natives of Old England; all contrasted with
the rough aspect of one or two back-settlers,
negotiating
sales of timber, from forests where axe had never
sounded. Sometimes a lady passed, swelling roundly
forth in an embroidered petticoat, balancing her steps
in high-heeled shoes, and courtesying, with lofty
grace, to the punctilious obeisances of the gentlemen.
The life of the town seemed to have its very centre
not far from an old mansion, that stood somewhat
back from the pavement, surrounded by neglected
grass, with a strange air of loneliness, rather
deepened
than dispelled by the throng so near it. Its site
would have been suitably occupied by a magnificent
Exchange, or a brick-block, lettered all over with
various
signs; or the large house itself might have made
a noble tavern, with the `King's Arms' swinging
before
it, and guests in every chamber, instead of the
present solitude. But, owing to some dispute about
the right of inheritance, the mansion had been long
without a tenant, decaying from year to year, and
throwing the stately gloom of its shadow over the
busiest part of the town. Such was the scene, and
such the time, when a figure, unlike any that have
been described, was observed at a distance down the
street.
`I espy a strange sail, yonder,' remarked a
Liverpool
captain; `that woman, in the long, white
garment
!'
The sailor seemed much struck by the object, as
were several others, who, at the same moment, caught
a glimpse of the figure, that had attracted his notice.
Almost immediately, the various topics of
conversation
gave place to speculations, in an under tone, on
this unwonted occurrence.
`Can there be a funeral, so late this afternoon?'
inquired some.
They looked for the signs of death at every door
the sexton, the hearse, the assemblage of
blackclad
relatives  all that makes up the woeful pomp of
funerals. They raised their eyes, also, to the sun-gilt
spire of the church, and wondered that no clang
proceeded
from its bell, which had always tolled till now,
when this figure appeared in the light of day. But
none had heard, that a corpse was to be borne to its
home that afternoon, nor was there any token of a
funeral, except the apparition of the `Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet.'
`What may this portend?' asked each man of his
neighbor.
All smiled as they put the question, yet with a
certain
trouble in their eyes, as if pestilence, or some
other wide calamity, were prognosticated by the
untimely
intrusion, among the living, of one whose
presence had always been associated with death and
woe. What a comet is to the earth, was that sad
woman to the town. Still she moved on, while the
hum of surprise was hushed at her approach, and the
proud and the humble stood aside, that her white
garment
might not wave against them. It was a long,
loose robe, of spotless purity. Its wearer appeared
very old, pale, emaciated, and feeble, yet glided
onward
,
without the unsteady pace of extreme age. At
one point of her course, a little rosy boy burst forth
from a door, and ran, with open arms, towards the
ghostly woman, seeming to expect a kiss from her
bloodless lips. She made a slight pause, fixing her
eye upon him with an expression of no earthly
sweetness
,
so that the child shivered and stood awe-struck,
rather than affrighted, while the Old Maid passed on.
Perhaps her garment might have been polluted, even
by an infant's touch; perhaps her kiss would have
been death to the sweet boy, within the year.
`She is but a shadow!' whispered the superstitious.
`The child put forth his arms, and could not grasp her
robe!'
The wonder was increased, when the Old Maid
passed beneath the porch of the deserted mansion,
ascended the moss-covered steps, lifted the iron
knocker, and gave three raps. The people could
only conjecture, that some old remembrance, troubling
her bewildered brain, had impelled the poor woman
hither to visit the friends of her youth; all gone from
their home, long since and forever, unless their ghosts
still haunted it  fit company for the `Old Maid in
the Winding-Sheet.' An elderly man approached the
steps, and reverently uncovering his gray locks,
essayed
to explain the matter.
`None, Madam,' said he, `have dwelt in this house
these fifteen years agone  no, not since the death of
old Colonel Fenwicke, whose funeral you may
remember
to have followed. His heirs, being ill-agreed
among themselves, have let the mansion-house go to
ruin.'
The Old Maid looked slowly round, with a slight
gesture of one hand, and a finger of the other upon
her lip, appearing more shadow-like than ever, in the
obscurity of the porch. But, again she lifted the
hammer, and gave, this time, a single rap. Could it
be, that a footstep was now heard, coming down the
staircase of the old mansion, which all conceived to
have been so long untenanted? Slowly, feebly, yet
heavily, like the pace of an aged and infirm person,
the step approached, more distinct on every
downward
stair, till it reached the portal. The bar fell on
the inside; the door was opened. One upward
glance, towards the church-spire, whence the
sunshine
had just faded, was the last that the people saw
of the `Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.'
`Who undid the door?' asked many.
This question, owing to the depth of shadow
beneath
the porch, no one could satisfactorily answer.
Two or three aged men, while protesting against an
inference, which might be drawn, affirmed that the
person within was a negro, and bore a singular
resemblance
to old Csar, formerly a slave in the house,
but freed by death some thirty years before.
`Her summons has waked up a servant of the old
family,' said one, half seriously.
`Let us wait here,' replied another. `More guests
will knock at the door, anon. But, the gate of the
grave-yard should be thrown open!'
Twilight had overspread the town, before the crowd
began to separate, or the comments on this incident
were exhausted. One after another was wending his
way homeward, when a coach  no common
spectacle
in those days  drove slowly into the street. It
was an old-fashioned equipage, hanging close to the
ground, with arms on the panels, a footman behind,
and a grave, corpulent coachman seated high in front
the whole giving an idea of solemn state and
dignity
.
There was something awful, in the heavy
rumbling
of the wheels. The coach rolled down the
street, till, coming to the gateway of the deserted
mansion, it drew up, and the footman sprang to the
ground.
`Whose grand coach is this?' asked a very
inquisitive
body.
The footman made no reply, but ascended the
steps of the old house, gave three raps, with the iron
hammer, and returned to open the coach-door. An
old man, possessed of the heraldie lore so
common
in that day, examined the shield of arms on the
panel.
`Azure, a lion's head erased, between three flower
de luces,' said he; then whispered the name of the
family to whom these bearings belonged. The last
inheritor of its honors was recently dead, after a long
residence amid the splendor of the British court,
where his birth and wealth had given him no mean
station. `He left no child,' continued the herald,
`and these arms, being in a lozenge, betoken that the
coach appertains to his widow.'
Further disclosures, perhaps, might have been
made, had not the speaker suddenly been struck
dumb, by the stern eye of an ancient lady, who thrust
forth her head from the coach, preparing to descend.
As she emerged, the people saw that her dress was
magnificent, and her figure dignified, in spite of age
and infirmity  a stately ruin, but with a look, at
once, of pride and wretchedness. Her strong and
rigid features had an awe about them, unlike that of
the white Old Maid, but as of something evil. She
passed up the steps, leaning on a gold-headed cane;
the door swung open, as she ascended  and the light
of a torch glittered on the embroidery of her dress,
and gleamed on the pillars of the porch. After a
momentary pause  a glance backwards  and then
a desperate effort  she went in. The decipherer of
the coat of arms had ventured up the lowest step,
and shrinking back immediately, pale and tremulous,
affirmed that the torch was held by the very image of
old Csar.
`But, such a hideous grin,' added he, `was never
seen on the face of mortal man, black or white! It
will haunt me till my dying day.'
Meantime, the coach had wheeled round, with a
prodigious clatter on the pavement, and rumbled up
the street, disappearing in the twilight, while the ear
still tracked its course. Scarcely was it gone, when
the people began to question, whether the coach and
attendants, the ancient lady, the spectre of old Csar,
and the Old Maid herself, were not all a strangely
combined delusion, with some dark purport in its
mystery
.
The whole town was astir, so that, instead of
dispersing, the crowd continually increased, and stood
gazing up at the windows of the mansion, now silvered
by the brightening moon. The elders, glad to indulge
the narrative propensity of age, told of the long faded
splendor of the family, the entertainments they had
given, and the guests, the greatest of the land, and
even titled and noble ones from abroad, who had
passed beneath that portal. These graphic
reminiscences
seemed to call up the ghosts of those to whom
they referred. So strong was the impression, on
some of the more imaginative hearers, that two or
three were seized with trembling fits, at one and the
same moment, protesting that they had distinctly
heard three other raps of the iron knocker.
`Impossible!' exclaimed others. `See! The
moon shines beneath the porch, and shows every part
of it, except in the narrow shade of that pillar. There
is no one there!'
`Did not the door open?' whispered one of these
fanciful persons.
`Didst thou see it, too?' said his companion, in a
startled tone.
But the general sentiment was opposed to the idea,
that a third visitant had made application at the door
of the deserted house. A few, however, adhered to
this new marvel, and even declared that a red gleam,
like that of a torch, had shone through the great front
window, as if the negro were lighting a guest up the
staircase. This, too, was pronounced a mere fantasy.
But, at once, the whole multitude started, and each
man beheld his own terror painted in the faces of all
the rest.
`What an awful thing is this!' cried they.
A shriek, too fearfully distinct for doubt, had been
heard within the mansion, breaking forth suddenly,
and succeeded by a deep stillness, as if a heart had
burst in giving it utterance. The people knew not
whether to fly from the very sight of the house, or
to rush trembling in, and search out the strange
mystery
.
Amid their confusion and affright, they were
somewhat reassured by the appearance of their
clergyman
,
a venerable patriarch, and equally a saint,
who had taught them and their fathers the way to
Heaven, for more than the space of an ordinary
lifetime
.
He was a reverend figure, with long, white
hair upon his shoulders, a white beard upon his breast,
and a back so bent over his staff, that he seemed to
be looking downward, continually, as if to choose a
proper grave for his weary frame. It was some time
before the good old man, being deaf, and of impaired
intellect, could be made to comprehend such portions
of the affair, as were comprehensible at all. But,
when possessed of the facts, his energies assumed
unexpected vigor.
`Verily,' said the old gentleman, `it will be fitting
that I enter the mansion-house of the worthy Colonel
Fenwicke, lest any harm should have befallen that
true Christian woman, whom ye call the "Old Maid
in the Winding-Sheet." '
Behold, then, the venerable clergyman ascending
the steps of the mansion, with a torch-bearer behind
him. It was the elderly man, who had spoken to the
Old Maid, and the same who had afterwards explained
the shield of arms, and recognised the features of the
negro. Like their predecessors, they gave three raps,
with the iron hammer.
`Old Csar cometh not,' observed the priest. `Well,
I wot, he no longer doth service in this mansion.'
`Assuredly, then, it was something worse, in old
Csar's likeness!' said the other adventurer.
`Be it as God wills,' answered the clergyman.
`See! my strength, though it be much decayed, hath
sufficed to open this heavy door. Let us enter, and
pass up the staircase.'
Here occurred a singular exemplification of the
dreamy state of a very old man's mind. As they
ascended the wide flight of stairs, the aged
clergyman
appeared to move with caution, occasionally
standing aside, and oftener bending his head, as it
were in salutation, thus practising all the gestures of
one who makes his way through a throng.
Reaching
the head of the staircase, he looked around, with
sad and solemn benignity, laid aside his staff, bared
his hoary locks, and was evidently on the point of
commencing a prayer.
`Reverend Sir,' said his attendant, who conceived
this a very suitable prelude to their further search,
`would it not be well, that the people join with us in
prayer?'
`Well-a-day!' cried the old clergyman, staring
strangely around him. `Art thou here with me, and
none other? Verily, past times were present to me,
and I deemed that I was to make a funeral prayer, as
many a time heretofore, from the head of this
staircase
.
Of a truth, I saw the shades of many that are
gone. Yea, I have prayed at their burials, one after
another, and the "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet"
hath seen them to their graves!'
Being now more thoroughly awake to their present
purpose, he took his staff, and struck forcibly on the
floor, till there came an echo from each deserted
chamber, but no menial, to answer their summons.
They therefore walked along the passage, and again
paused, opposite to the great front window, through
which was seen the crowd, in the shadow and partial
moonlight of the street beneath. On their right hand,
was the open door of a chamber, and a closed one
on their left. The clergyman pointed his cane to the
carved oak panel of the latter.
`Within that chamber,' observed he, `a whole
lifetime
since, did I sit by the death-bed of a goodly
young man, who, being now at the last gasp'
Apparently, there was some powerful excitement
in the ideas which had now flashed across his mind.
He snatched the torch from his companion's hand,
and threw open the door with such sudden violence,
that the flame was extinguished, leaving them no
other light than the moonbeams, which fell through two
windows into the spacious chamber. It was
sufficient
to discover all that could be known. In a
high-backed
,
oaken arm-chair, upright, with her hands
clasped across her breast, and her head thrown back,
sat the `Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.' The stately
dame had fallen on her knees, with her forehead on
the holy knees of the Old Maid, one hand upon the
floor, and the other pressed convulsively against her
heart. It clutched a lock of hair, once sable, now
discolored with a greenish mould. As the priest and
layman advanced into the chamber, the Old Maid's
features assumed such a semblance of shifting
expression
,
that they trusted to hear the whole mystery
explained, by a single word. But it was only the
shadow of a tattered curtain, waving betwixt the dead
face and the moonlight.
`Both dead!' said the venerable man. `Then
who shall divulge the secret? Methinks it glimmers
to-and-fro in my mind, like the light and shadow
across the Old Maid's face. And now 't is gone!'
PETER GOLDTHWAITE'S TREASURE.
VOL. II. 14
`
And
so, Peter, you won't even consider of the
business
?'
said Mr. John Brown, buttoning his surtout
over the snug rotundity of his person, and drawing
on his gloves. `You positively refuse to let me have
this crazy old house, and the land under and
adjoining
,
at the price named?'
`Neither at that, nor treble the sum,' responded
the gaunt, grizzled, and threadbare Peter Goldthwaite.
`The fact is, Mr. Brown, you must find another site
for your brick block, and be content to leave my
estate with the present owner. Next summer, I
intend to put a splendid new mansion over the cellar
of the old house.'
`Pho, Peter!' cried Mr. Brown, as he opened the
kitchen door; `content yourself with building
castles
in the air, where house-lots are cheaper than on
earth, to say nothing of the cost of bricks and mortar.
Such foundations are solid enough for your edifices;
while this underneath us is just the thing for mine; and
so we may both be suited. What say you, again?'
`Precisely what I said before, Mr. Brown,'
answered
Peter Goldthwaite. `And, as for castles in the
air, mine may not be as magnificent as that sort of
architecture, but perhaps as substantial, Mr. Brown,
as the very respectable brick block with dry-goods
stores, tailors' shops, and banking-rooms on the lower
floor, and lawyers' offices in the second story, which
you are so anxious to substitute.'
`And the cost, Peter, eh?' said Mr. Brown, as
he withdrew, in something of a pet. `That, I
suppose
,
will be provided for, off-hand, by drawing a
check on Bubble Bank!'
John Brown and Peter Goldthwaite had been jointly
known to the commercial world between twenty and
thirty years before, under the firm of Goldthwaite and
Brown; which copartnership, however, was speedily
dissolved, by the natural incongruity of its constituent
parts. Since that event, John Brown, with exactly
the qualities of a thousand other John Browns, and
by just such plodding methods as they used, had
prospered wonderfully, and become one of the
wealthiest
John Browns on earth. Peter Goldthwaite, on the
contrary, after innumerable schemes, which ought to
have collected all the coin and paper currency of
the country into his coffers, was as needy a
gentleman
as ever wore a patch upon his elbow. The
contrast
between him and his former partner may be
briefly marked: for Brown never reckoned upon
luck, yet always had it; while Peter made luck the
main condition of his projects, and always missed it.
While the means held out, his speculations had been
magnificent, but were chiefly confined, of late years,
to such small business as adventures in the lottery.
Once, he had gone on a gold-gathering expedition,
somewhere to the South, and ingeniously contrived
to empty his pockets more thoroughly than ever;
while others, doubtless, were filling theirs with native
bullion by the handfull. More recently, he had
expended
a legacy of a thousand or two of dollars in
purchasing Mexican scrip, and thereby became the
proprietor of a province; which, however, so far as
Peter could find out, was situated where he might have
had an empire for the same money,  in the clouds.
From a search after this valuable real estate, Peter
returned so gaunt and threadbare, that, on reaching
New England, the scarecrows in the corn-fields
beckoned
to him, as he passed by. `They did but flutter
in the wind,' quoth Peter Goldthwaite. No, Peter,
they beckoned, for the scarecrows knew their brother!
At the period of our story, his whole visible income
would not have paid the tax of the old mansion in
which we find him. It was one of those rusty,
moss-grown
,
many-peaked, wooden houses, which are
scattered
about the streets of our elder towns, with a
beetle-browed second story projecting over the
foundation
,
as if it frowned at the novelty around it. This
old paternal edifice, needy as he was, and though,
being centrally situated on the principal street of the
town, it would have brought him a handsome sum,
the sagacious Peter had his own reasons for never
parting with, either by auction or private sale. There
seemed, indeed, to be a fatality that connected him
with his birth-place; for, often as he had stood on
the verge of ruin, and standing there even now, he
had not yet taken the step beyond it, which would
have compelled him to surrender the house to his
creditors. So here he dwelt with bad luck till good
should come.
Here, then, in his kitchen, the only room where a
spark of fire took off the chill of a November
evening
,
poor Peter Goldthwaite had just been visited by
his rich old partner. At the close of their interview,
Peter, with rather a mortified look, glanced
downwards
at his dress, parts of which appeared as
ancient
as the days of Goldthwaite and Brown. His
upper garment was a mixed surtout, wofully faded,
and patched with newer stuff on each elbow;
beneath
this, he wore a threadbare black coat, some of
the silk buttons of which had been replaced with
others of a different pattern; and, lastly, though he
lacked not a pair of gray pantaloons, they were very
shabby ones, and had been partially turned brown,
by the frequent toasting of Peter's shins before a
scanty fire. Peter's person was in keeping with his
goodly apparel. Gray-headed, hollow-eyed,
pale-cheeked
,
and lean-bodied, he was the perfect picture
of a man who had fed on windy schemes and empty
hopes, till he could neither live on such unwholesome
trash, nor stomach more substantial food. But, withal,
this Peter Goldthwaite, crack-brained simpleton as,
perhaps, he was, might have cut a very brilliant
figure in the world, had he employed his
imagination
in the airy business of poetry, instead of making
it a demon of mischief in mercantile pursuits. After
all, he was no bad fellow, but as harmless as a child,
and as honest and honorable, and as much of the
gentleman
which nature meant him for, as an irregular
life and depressed circumstances will permit any
man to be.
As Peter stood on the uneven bricks of his hearth,
looking round at the disconsolate old kitchen, his eyes
began to kindle with the illumination of an
enthusiasm
that never long deserted him. He raised his
hand, clenched it, and smote it energetically against
the smoky panel over the fireplace.
`The time is come!' said he. `With such a
treasure
at command, it were folly to be a poor man any
longer. To-morrow morning I will begin with the
garret, nor desist till I have torn the house down!'
Deep in the chimney-corner, like a witch in a dark
cavern, sat a little old woman, mending one of the
two pairs of stockings wherewith Peter Goldthwaite
kept his toes from being frost-bitten. As the feet
were ragged past all darning, she had cut pieces
out of a cast-off flannel petticoat, to make new soles.
Tabitha Porter was an old maid, upwards of sixty
years of age, fifty-five of which she had sat in that
same chimney-corner, such being the length of time
since Peter's grandfather had taken her from the
almshouse. She had no friend but Peter, nor Peter
any friend but Tabitha; so long as Peter might have
a shelter for his own head, Tabitha would know
where to shelter hers; or, being homeless elsewhere,
she would take her master by the hand, and bring
him to her native home, the almshouse. Should it
ever be necessary, she loved him well enough to feed
him with her last morsel, and clothe him with her
under-petticoat. But Tabitha was a queer old
woman
,
and, though never infected with Peter's
flightiness
,
had become so accustomed to his freaks and
follies, that she viewed them all as matters of course.
Hearing him threaten to tear the house down, she
looked quietly up from her work.
`Best leave the kitchen till the last, Mr. Peter,'
said she.
`The sooner we have it all down the better,' said
Peter Goldthwaite. `I am tired to death of living in
this cold, dark, windy, smoky, creaking, groaning,
dismal old house. I shall feel like a younger man,
when we get into my splendid brick mansion, as,
please Heaven, we shall, by this time next autumn.
You shall have a room on the sunny side, old Tabby,
finished and furnished as best may suit your own
notions.'
`I should like it pretty much such a room as this
kitchen,' answered Tabitha. `It will never be like
home to me, till the chimney-corner gets as black
with smoke as this; and that won't be these hundred
years. How much do you mean to lay out on the
house, Mr. Peter?'
`What is that to the purpose?' exclaimed Peter,
loftily. `Did not my great-grand-uncle, Peter
Goldthwaite
,
who died seventy years ago, and whose
namesake
I am, leave treasure enough to build twenty
such?'
`I can't say but he did, Mr. Peter,' said Tabitha,
threading her needle.
Tabitha well understood, that Peter had reference
to an immense hoard of the precious metals, which
was said to exist somewhere in the cellar or walls, or
under the floors, or in some concealed closet, or
other out-of-the-way nook, of the old house. This
wealth, according to tradition, had been accumlated
by a former Peter Goldthwaite, whose character seems
to have borne a remarkable similitude to that of the
Peter of our story. Like him, he was a wild
projector
,
seeking to heap up gold by the bushel and the
cart-load, instead of scraping it together, coin by
coin. Like Peter the second, too, his projects had
almost invariably failed, and, but for the magnificent
success of the final one, would have left him with
hardly a coat and pair of breeches to his gaunt and
grizzled person. Reports were various, as to the
nature of his fortunate speculation; one intimating,
that the ancient Peter had made the gold by alchymy;
another, that he had conjured it out of people's
pockets by the black art; and a third, still more
unaccountable
,
that the devil had given him free access
to the old provincial treasury. It was affirmed,
however
,
that some secret impediment had debarred him
from the enjoyment of his riches, and that he had a
motive for concealing them from his heir, or, at any
rate, had died without disclosing the place of deposit.
The present Peter's father had faith enough in the
story to cause the cellar to be dug over. Peter
himself
chose to consider the legend as an indisputable
truth, and, amid his many troubles, had this one
consolation
,
that, should all other resources fail, he
might build up his fortunes by tearing his house
down. Yet, unless he felt a lurking distrust of the
golden tale, it is difficult to account for his permitting
the paternal roof to stand so long, since he had never
yet seen the moment, when his predecessor's
treasure
would not have found plenty of room in his own
strong box. But, now was the crisis. Should he
delay
the search a little longer, the house would pass
from the lineal heir, and with it the vast heap of
gold, to remain in its burial-place, till the ruin of the
aged walls should discover it to strangers of a future
generation.
`Yes!' cried Peter Goldthwaite, again; `to-
morrow
I will set about it.'
The deeper he looked at the matter, the more
certain
of success grew Peter. His spirits were
naturally
so elastic, that, even now, in the blasted
autumn
of his age, he could often compete with the
spring-time gayety of other people. Enlivened by
his brightening prospects, he began to caper about
the kitchen like a hobgoblin, with the queerest antics
of his lean limbs, and gesticulations of his starved
features. Nay, in the exuberance of his feelings, he
seized both of Tabitha's hands, and danced the old
lady across the floor, till the oddity of her rheumatic
motions set him into a roar of laughter, which was
echoed back from the rooms and chambers, as if
Peter
Goldthwaite were laughing in every one. Finally,
he bounded upward, almost out of sight, into the
smoke that clouded the roof of the kitchen, and,
alighting safely on the floor again, endeavored to
resume
his customary gravity.
`To-morrow, at sunrise,' he repeated, taking his
lamp, to retire to bed, `I'll see whether this treasure
be hid in the wall of the garret.'
`And, as we're out of wood, Mr. Peter,' said
Tabitha, puffing and panting with her late
gymnastics
,
`as fast as you tear the house down, I'll make a
fire with the pieces.'
Gorgeous, that night, were the dreams of Peter
Goldthwaite! At one time, he was turning a
ponderous
key in an iron door, not unlike the door of a
sepulchre, but which, being opened, disclosed a vault,
heaped up with gold coin, as plentifully as golden
corn in a granary. There were chased goblets, also,
and tureens, salvers, dinner-dishes, and dish-covers,
of gold, or silver-gilt, besides chains and other jewels,
incalculably rich, though tarnished with the damps of
the vault; for, of all the wealth that was irrevocably
lost to man, whether buried in the earth, or sunken in
the sea, Peter Goldthwaite had found it in this one
treasure-place. Anon, he had returned to the old
house, as poor as ever, and was received at the door,
by the gaunt and grizzled figure of a man, whom he
might have mistaken for himself, only that his
garments
were of a much elder fashion. But the house,
without losing its former aspect, had been changed
into a palace of the precious metals. The floors,
walls, and ceilings, were of burnished silver; the
doors, the window-frames, the cornices, the
balustrades
,
and the steps of the staircase, of pure gold;
and silver, with gold bottoms, were the chairs, and
gold, standing on silver legs, the high chests of
drawers, and silver the bedsteads, with blankets of
woven gold, and sheets of silver tissue. The house
had evidently been transmuted by a single touch;
for it retained all the marks that Peter remembered,
but in gold or silver, instead of wood; and the initials
of his name, which, when a boy, he had cut in the
wooden door-post, remained as deep in the pillar of
gold. A happy man would have been Peter
Goldthwaite
,
except for a certain ocular deception, which,
whenever he glanced backward, caused the house to
darken from its glittering magnificence into the sordid
gloom of yesterday.
Up, betimes, rose Peter, seized an axe, hammer,
and saw, which he had placed by his bedside, and
hied him to the garret. It was but scantily lighted
up, as yet, by the frosty fragments of a sunbeam,
which began to glimmer through the almost opaqe
bull's eyes of the window. A moralizer might find
abundant themes for his speculative and
impracticable
wisdom, in a garret. There is the limbo of
departed fashions, aged trifles of a day, and whatever
was valuable only to one generation of men, and
which passed to the garret when that generation
passed to the grave, not for safe keeping, but to be
out of the way. Peter saw piles of yellow and musty
account-books, in parchment covers, wherein
creditors
,
long dead and buried, had written the names of
dead and buried debtors, in ink now so faded, that
their moss-grown tombstones were more legible. He
found old, moth-eaten garments, all in rags and
tatters
,
or Peter would have put them on. Here was a
naked and rusty sword, not a sword of service, but a
gentleman's small French rapier, which had never left
its scabbard till it lost it. Here were canes of twenty
different sorts, but no gold-headed ones, and
shoe-buckles
of various pattern and material, but not
silver, nor set with precious stones. Here was a
large box full of [shoes, with high heels and peaked
toes. Here, on a shelf, were a multitude of phials,
half filled with old apothecary's stuff, which, when
the other half had done its business on Peter's
ancestors
,
had been brought hither from the
death-chamber
.
Here,  not to give a longer inventory of
articles
that will never be put up at auction,  was the
fragment of a full-length looking-glass, which, by the
dust and dimness of its surface, made the picture of
these old things look older than the reality. When
Peter, not knowing that there was a mirror there,
caught the faint traces of his own figure, he partly
imagined that the former Peter Goldthwaite had come
back, either to assist or impede his search for the
hidden wealth. And at that moment a strange
notion
glimmered through his brain, that he was the
identical Peter who had concealed the gold, and
ought to know whereabout it lay. This, however
he had unaccountably forgotten.
`Well, Mr. Peter!' cried Tabitha, on the garret
stairs. `Have you torn the house down enough to
heat the tea-kettle?'
`Not yet, old Tabby,' answered Peter; `but that's
soon done,  as you shall see.'
With the word in his mouth, he uplifted the axe,
and laid about him so vigorously, that the dust flew,
the boards crashed, and, in a twinkling, the old
woman
had an apron full of broken rubbish.
`We shall get our winter's wood cheap,' quoth
Tabitha.
The good work being thus commenced, Peter beat
down all before him, smiting and hewing at the
joists and timbers, unclenching spike-nails, ripping
and tearing away boards, with a tremendous racket,
from morning till night. He took care, however, to
leave the outside shell of the house untouched, so
that the neighbors might not suspect what was going
on.
Never, in any of his vagaries, though each had
made him happy while it lasted, had Peter been
happier
than now. Perhaps, after all, there was
something
in Peter Goldthwaite's turn of mind, which
brought him an inward recompense for all the
external
evil that it caused. If he were poor, ill clad,
even hungry, and exposed, as it were, to be utterly
annihilated by a precipice of impending ruin, yet
only his body remained in these miserable
circumstances
,
while his aspiring soul enjoyed the sunshine
of a bright futurity. It was his nature to be always
young, and the tendency of his mode of life to keep
him so. Gray hairs were nothing, no, nor wrinkles,
nor infirmity; he might look old, indeed, and be
somewhat disagreeably connected with a gaunt old
figure, much the worse for wear; but the true, the
essential Peter, was a young man of high hopes, just
entering on the world. At the kindling of each new
fire, his burnt-out youth rose afresh from the old
embers
and ashes. It rose exulting now. Having lived
thus long,  not too long, but just to the right age,
a susceptible bachelor, with warm and tender dreams,
he resolved, so soon as the hidden gold should flash
to light, to go a wooing, and win the love of the
fairest
maid in town. What heart could resist him?
Happy Peter Goldthwaite!
Every evening,  as Peter had long absented
himself
from his former lounging-places, at insurance
offices, news-rooms, and bookstores, and as the honor
of his company was seldom requested in private
circles
,
he and Tabitha used to sit down sociably by
the kitchen hearth. This was always heaped
plentifully
with the rubbish of his day's labor. As the
foundation of the fire, there would be a goodly sized
backlog of red oak, which, after being sheltered from
rain or damp above a century, still hissed with the
heat, and distilled streams of water from each end,
as if the tree had been cut down within a week or
two. Next, there were large sticks, sound, black and
heavy, which had lost the principle of decay, and
were indestructible except by fire, wherein they
glowed like red-hot bars of iron. On this solid basis,
Tabitha would rear a lighter structure, composed of
the splinters of door-panels, ornamented mouldings,
and such quick combustibles, which caught like straw,
and threw a brilliant blaze high up the spacious flue,
making its sooty sides visible almost to the
chimney-top
.
Meantime, the gloom of the old kitchen would
be chased out of the cob-wehhed corners, and away
from the dusky cross-beams overhead, and driven
nobody could tell whither, while Peter smiled like a
gladsome man, and Tabitha seemed a picture of
comfortable age. All this, of course, was but an
emblem
of the bright fortune, which the destruction of
the house would shed upon its occupants.
While the dry pine was flaming and crackling,
like an irregular discharge of fairy musketry, Peter
sat looking and listening, in a pleasant state of
excitement
.
But, when the brief blaze and uproar
were succeeded by the dark red glow, the substantial
heat, and the deep singing sound, which were to last
throughout the evening, his humor became talkative.
One night, the hundredth time, he teased Tabitha to
tell him something new about his great-grand-uncle.
`You have been sitting in that chimney-corner
fifty-five
years, old Tabby, and must have heard many a
tradition about him,' said Peter. `Did not you tell
me, that, when you first came to the house, there
was an old woman sitting where you sit now, who
had been housekeeper to the famous Peter
Goldthwaite
?'
`So there was, Mr. Peter,' answered Tabitha; `and
she was near about a hundred years old. She used
to say, that she and old Peter Goldthwaite had often
spent a sociable evening by the kitchen fire,  pretty
much as you and I are doing now, Mr. Peter.'
`The old fellow must have resembled me in more
points than one,' said Peter, complacently, `or he
never would have grown so rich. But, methinks, he
might have invested the money better than he did,
no interest!  nothing but good security!  and the
house to be torn down to come at it! What made
him hide it so snug, Tabby?'
`Because he could not spend it,' said Tabitha; `for,
as often as he went to unlock the chest, the Old
Scratch came behind and caught his arm. The
money, they say, was paid Peter out of his purse;
and he wanted Peter to give him a deed of this house
and land, which Peter swore he would not do.'
`Just as I swore to John Brown, my old partner,
remarked Peter. `But this is all nonsense, Tabby!
I don't believe the story.'
`Well, it may not be just the truth,' said Tabitha;
`for some folks say, that Peter did make over the
house to the Old Scratch; and that's the reason it
has always been so unlucky to them that lived in it.
And as soon as Peter had given him the deed, the
chest flew open, and Peter caught up a handful of
the gold. But, lo and behold!  there was nothing
in his fist but a parcel of old rags.'
`Hold your tongue, you silly old Tabby!' cried
Peter, in great wrath. `They were as good golden
guineas as ever bore the effigies of the king of
England
.
It seems as if I could recollect the whole
circumstance
,
and how I, or old Peter, or whoever it
was, thrust in my hand, or his hand, and drew it out,
all of a blaze with gold. Old rags, indeed!'
But it was not an old woman's legend that would
discourage Peter Goldthwaite. All night long, he slept
among pleasant dreams, and awoke at daylight with
a joyous throb of the heart, which few are fortunate
enough to feel, beyond their boyhood. Day after
day, he labored hard, without wasting a moment,
except
at meal times, when Tabitha summoned him to
the pork and cabbage, or such other sustenance as
she had picked up, or Providence had sent them.
Being a truly pious man, Peter never failed to ask a
blessing; if the food were none of the best, then
so much the more earnestly, as it was more needed;
nor to return thanks, if the dinner had been scanty,
yet for the good appetite, which was better than a sick
stomach at a feast. Then did he hurry back to his
toil, and, in a moment, was lost to sight in a cloud of
dust from the old walls, though sufficiently
perceptible
to the car, by the clatter which he raised in the
midst of it. How enviable is the consciousness of
being usefully employed! Nothing troubled Peter;
or nothing but those phantoms of the mind, which
seem like vague recollections, yet have also the
aspect of presentiments. He often paused, with his
axe uplifted in the air, and said to himself,  `Peter
Goldthwaite, did you never strike this blow before?'
or  `Peter, what need of tearing the whole house
down? Think, a little while, and you will
remember
where the gold is hidden.' Days and weeks
passed on, however, without any remarkable
discovery
.
Sometimes, indeed, a lean, gray rat peeped
forth at the lean, gray man, wondering what devil
VOL. II. 15
had got into the old house, which had always been
so peaceable till now. And, occasionally, Peter
sympathized
with the sorrows of a female mouse, who
had brought five or six pretty, little, soft, and
delicate
young ones into the world, just in time to
see them crushed by its ruin. But, as yet, no
treasure!
By this time, Peter, being as determined as Fate,
and as diligent as Time, had made an end with the
uppermost regions, and got down to the second story,
where he was busy in one of the front chambers. It
had formerly been the state bedchamber, and was
honored by tradition as the sleeping apartment of
Governor Dudley, and many other eminent guests.
The furniture was gone. There were remnants of
faded and tattered paper-hangings, but larger spaces
of bare wall, ornamented with charcoal sketches,
chiefly of people's heads in profile. These being
specimens of Peter's youthful genius, it went more
to his heart to obliterate them, than if they had been
pictures on a church wall by Michael Angelo. One
sketch, however, and that the best one, affected him
differently. It represented a ragged man, partly
supporting
himself on a spade, and bending his lean
body over a hole in the earth, with one hand
extended
to grasp something that he had found. But,
close behind him, with a fiendish laugh on his
features
,
appeared a figure with horns, a tufted tail, and
a cloven hoof.
`Avaunt, Satan!' cried Peter. `The man shall
have his gold!'
Uplifting his axe, he hit the horned gentleman such
a blow on the head, as not only demolished him, but
the treasure-seeker also, and caused the whole scene
to vanish like magic. Moreover, his axe broke quite
through the plaster and laths, and discovered a cavity.
`Mercy on us, Mr. Peter, are you quarreling with
the Old Scratch?' said Tabitha, who was seeking
some fuel to put under the dinner pot.
Without answering the old woman, Peter broke
down a further space of the wall, and laid open a
small closet or cupboard, on one side of the fireplace,
about breast-high from the ground. It contained
nothing but a brass lamp, covered with verdigris, and
a dusty piece of parchment. While Peter inspected
the latter, Tabitha seized the lamp, and began to rub
it with her apron.
`There is no use in rubbing it, Tabitha,' said Peter.
`It is not Aladdin's lamp, though I take it to be a
token of as much luck. Look here, Tabby!'
Tabitha took the parchment, and held it close to
her nose, which was saddled with a pair of iron-bound
spectacles. But no sooner had she begun to puzzle
over it, than she burst into a chuckling laugh,
holding
both her hands against her sides.
`You can't make a fool of the old woman!' cried
she. `This is your own handwriting, Mr. Peter! the
same as in the letter you sent me from Mexico.'
`There is certainly a considerable resemblance,'
said Peter, again examining the parchment. `But
you know yourself, Tabby, that this closet must have
been plastered up before you came to the house, or I
came into the world. No; this is old Peter
Goldthwaite's
writing; these columns of pounds, shillings,
and pence, are his figures, denoting the amount of
the treasure; and this, at the bottom, is, doubtless, a
reference to the place of concealment. But the ink
has either faded or peeled off, so that it is absolutely
illegible. What a pity!'
`Well; this lamp is as good as new. That's
some comfort,' said Tabitha.
`A lamp!' thought Peter. `That indicates light
on my researches.'
For the present, Peter felt more inclined to ponder
on this discovery, than to resume his labors. After
Tabitha had gone down stairs, he stood poring over
the parchment, at one of the front windows, which
was so obscured with dust, that the sun could barely
throw an uncertain shadow of the casement across
the floor. Peter forced it open, and looked out upon
the great street of the town, while the sun looked in
at his old house. The air, though mild, and even
warm, thrilled Peter, as with a dash of water.
It was the first day of the January thaw. The
snow lay deep upon the house-tops, but was rapidly
dissolving into millions of water-drops, which sparkled
downwards through the sunshine, with the noise of a
summer shower beneath the eaves. Along the street,
the trodden snow was as hard and solid as a
pavement
of white marble, and had not yet grown moist,
in the spring-like temperature. But, when Peter
thrust forth his head, he saw that the inhabitants, if
not the town, were already thawed out by this warm
day, after two or three weeks of winter weather. It
gladdened him,  a gladness with a sigh breathing
through it,  to see the stream of ladies, gliding
along the slippery side-walks, with their red cheeks
set off by quilted hoods, boas, and sable capes, like
roses amidst a new kind of foliage. The sleigh-bells
jingled to and fro continually, sometimes announcing
the arrival of a sleigh from Vermont, laden with the
frozen bodies of porkers, or sheep, and perhaps a
deer or two; sometimes, of a regular market-man,
with chickens, geese, and turkeys, comprising the
whole colony of a barn-yard; and sometimes, of a
farmer and his dame, who had come to town partly
for the ride, partly to go a shopping, and partly for
the sale of some eggs and butter. This couple rode
in an old-fashioned square sleigh, which had served
them twenty winters, and stood twenty summers in
the sun, beside their door. Now, a gentleman and
lady skimmed the snow, in an elegant car, shaped
somewhat like a cockle-shell. Now, a stage-sleigh,
with its cloth curtains thrust aside to admit the sun,
dashed rapidly down the street, whirling in and out
among the vehicles that obstructed its passage. Now
came, round a corner, the similitude of Noah's ark,
on runners, being an immense open sleigh, with
seats for fifty people, and drawn by a dozen horses.
This spacious receptacle was populous with merry
maids and merry bachelors, merry girls and boys,
and merry old folks, all alive with fun, and
grinning
to the full width of their mouths. They kept
up a buzz of babbling voices and low laughter, and
sometimes burst into a deep, joyous shout, which the
spectators answered with three cheers, while a gang
of roguish boys let drive their snowballs right among
the pleasure-party. The sleigh passed on, and, when
concealed by a bend of the street, was still audible
by a distant cry of merriment.
Never had Peter beheld a livelier scene than was
constituted by all these accessories: the bright sun;
the flashing water-drops; the gleaming snow; the
cheerful multitude; the variety of rapid vehicles;
and the jingle-jangle of merry bells, which made the
heart dance to their music. Nothing dismal was to
be seen, except that peaked piece of antiquity, Peter
Goldthwaite's house, which might well look sad
externally
,
since such a terrible consumption was preying
on its insides. And Peter's gaunt figure, half visible
in the projecting second story, was worthy of his
house.
`Peter! How goes it, friend Peter?' cried a voice
across the street, as Peter was drawing in his head.
`Look out here, Peter!'
Peter looked, and saw his old partner, Mr. John
Brown, on the opposite side-walk, portly and
comfortable
,
with his furred cloak thrown open, disclosing
a handsome surtout beneath. His voice had directed
the attention of the whole town to Peter Goldthwaite's
window, and to the dusty scarecrow which appeared
at it.
`I say, Peter,' cried Mr. Brown again, `what the
devil are you about there, that I hear such a racket,
whenever I pass by? You are repairing the old
house, I suppose,  making a new one of it,
eh?'
`Too late for that, I am afraid, Mr. Brown,'
replied
Peter. `If I make it new, it will be new inside
and out, from the cellar upwards.'
`Had not you better let me take the job?' said
Mr. Brown, significantly.
`Not yet!' answered Peter, hastily shutting the
window; for, ever since he had been in search of
the treasure, he hated to have people stare at him.
As he drew back, ashamed of his outward poverty,
yet proud of the secret wealth within his grasp, a
haughty smile shone out on Peter's visage, with
precisely
the effect of the dim sunbeams in the squalid
chamber. He endeavored to assume such a mien as
his ancestor had probably worn, when he gloried in
the building of a strong house for a home to many
generations of his posterity. But the chamber was
very dark to his snow-dazzled eyes, and very dismal
too, in contrast with the living scene that he had just
looked upon. His brief glimpse into the street had
given him a forcible impression of the manner in
which the world kept itself cheerful and prosperous,
by social pleasures and an intercourse of business,
while he, in seclusion, was pursuing an object that
might possibly be a phantasm, by a method which
most people would call madness. It is one great
advantage of a gregarious mode of life, that each
person rectifies his mind by other minds, and squares
his conduct to that of his neighbors, so as seldom to
be lost in eccentricity. Peter Goldthwaite had exposed
himself to this influence, by merely looking out of
the window. For a while, he doubted whether there
were any hidden chest of gold, and, in that case,
whether it was so exceedingly wise to tear the house
down, only to be convinced of its non-existence.
But this was momentary. Peter, the Destroyer,
resumed the task which fate had assigned him, nor
faltered again, till it was accomplished. In the course
of his search, he met with many things that are
usually
found in the ruins of an old house, and also with
some that are not. What seemed most to the
purpose
,
was a rusty key, which had been thrust into a
chink of the wall, with a wooden label appended to
the handle, bearing the initials, P. G. Another
singular
discovery was that of a bottle of wine, walled
up in an old oven. A tradition ran in the family, that
Peter's grandfather, a jovial officer in the old French
war, had set aside many dozens of the precious
liquor, for the benefit of topers then unborn. Peter
needed no cordial to sustain his hopes, and therefore
kept the wine to gladden his success. Many
halfpence
did he pick up, that had been lost through the
cracks of the floor, and some few Spanish coins, and
the half of a broken sixpence, which had doubtless
been a love-token. There was likewise a silver
coronation
medal of George the Third. But, old Peter
Golthwaite's strong box fled from one dark corner to
another, or otherwise eluded the second Peter's
clutches, till, should he seek much further, he must
burrow into the earth.
We will not follow him in his triumphant progress,
step by step. Suffice it, that Peter worked like a
steam engine, and finished, in that one winter, the
job, which all the former inhabitants of the house,
with time and the elements to aid them, had only half
done in a century. Except the kitchen, every room
and chamber was now gutted. The house was
nothing
but a shell,  the apparition of a house,  as
unreal as the painted edifices of a theatre. It was
like the perfect rind of a great cheese, in which a
mouse had dwelt and nibbled, till it was a cheese no
more. And Peter was the mouse.
What Peter had torn down, Tabitha had burnt up:
for she wisely considered, that, without a house, they
should need no wood to warm it; and therefore
economy
was nonsense. Thus the whole house might be
said to have dissolved in smoke, and flown up among
the clouds, through the great black flue of the kitchen
chimney. It was an admirable parallel to the feat of
the man who jumped down his own throat.
On the night between the last day of winter and
the first of spring, every chink and cranny had been
ransacked, except within the precincts of the kitchen.
This fated evening was an ugly one. A snow-storm
had set in some hours before, and was still driven and
tossed about the atmosphere by a real hurricane,
which fought against the house, as if the prince of the
air, in person, were putting the final stroke to Peter's
labors. The framework being so much weakened,
and the inward props removed, it would have been no
marvel, if, in some stronger wrestle of the blast, the
rotten walls of the edifice, and all the peaked roofs,
had come crashing down upon the owner's head.
He, however, was careless of the peril, but as wild
and restless as the night itself, or as the flame that
quivered up the chimney, at each roar of the
tempestuous
wind.
`The wine, Tabitha!' he cried. `My
grandfather's
rich old wine! We will drink it now!'
Tabitha arose from her smoke-blackened bench in
the chimney-corner, and placed the bottle before Peter,
close beside the old brass lamp, which had likewise
been the prize of his researches. Peter held it
before
his eyes, and looking through the liquid medium,
beheld the kitchen illuminated with a golden glory,
which also enveloped Tabitha, and gilded her silver
hair, and converted her mean garments into robes of
queenly splendor. It reminded him of his golden
dream.
`Mr. Peter,' remarked Tabitha `must the wine be
drunk before the money is found?'
`The money
is
found!' exclaimed Peter, with a
sort of fierceness. `The chest is within my reach.
I will not sleep, till I have turned this key in the rusty
lock. But, first of all, let us drink!'
There being no corkscrew in the house, he smote
the neck of the bottle with old Peter Goldthwaite's
rusty key, and decapitated the sealed cork at a single
blow. He then filled two little china teacups, which
Tabitha had brought from the cupboard. So clear
and brilliant was this aged wine, that it shone within
the cups, and rendered the sprig of scarlet flowers,
at the bottom of each, more distinctly visible, than
when there had been no wine there. Its rich and
delicate perfume wasted itself round the kitchen.
`Drink, Tabitha!' cried Peter. `Blessings on the
honest old fellow, who set aside this good liquor for
you and me! And here's to Peter Goldthwaite's
memory!'
`And good cause have we to remember him,' quoth
Tabitha, as she drank.
How many years, and through what changes of
fortune, and various calamity, had that bottle hoarded
up its effervescent joy, to be quaffed at last by two
such boon companions! A portion of the happiness
of a former age had been kept for them, and was
now set free, in a crowd of rejoicing visions, to sport
amid the storm and desolation of the present time.
Until they have finished the bottle, we must turn our
eyes elsewhere.
It so chanced, that, on this stormy night, Mr. John
Brown found himself ill at ease, in his wire-cushioned
arm-chair, by the glowing grate of anthracite, which
heated his handsome parlor. He was naturally a
good sort of a man, and kind and pitiful, whenever
the misfortunes of others happened to reach his heart
through the padded vest of his own prosperity. This
evening, he had thought much about his old partner,
Peter Goldthwaite, his strange vagaries, and
continual
ill luck, the poverty of his dwelling, at Mr.
Brown's last visit, and Peter's crazed and haggard
aspect
,
when he had talked with him at the window.
`Poor fellow!' thought Mr. John Brown. `Poor,
crackbrained Peter Goldthwaite! For old
acquaintance
'
sake, I ought to have taken care that he was
comfortable, this rough winter.'
These feelings grew so powerful, that, in spite of
the inclement weather, he resolved to visit Peter
Goldthwaite immediately. The strength of the
impulse
was really singular. Every shriek of the blast
seemed a summons, or would have seemed so, had
Mr. Brown been accustomed to hear the echoes of
his own fancy in the wind. Much amazed at such
active benevolence, he huddled himself in his cloak,
muffled his throat and ears in comforters and
handkerchiefs
,
and thus fortified, bade defiance to the
tempest
.
But, the powers of the air had rather the best
of the battle. Mr. Brown was just weathering the
corner, by Peter Goldthwaite's house, when the
hurricane
caught him off his feet, tossed him face
downward
into a snow-bank, and proceeded to bury his
protuberant part beneath fresh drifts. There seemed
little hope of his reappearance, earlier than the next
thaw. At the same moment, his hat was snatched
away, and whirled aloft into some far distant region,
whence no tidings have as yet returned.
Nevertheless Mr. Brown contrived to burrow a
passage
through the snow-drift, and, with his bare head
bent against the storm, floundered onward to Peter's
door. There was such a creaking, and groaning, and
rattling, and such an ominous shaking throughout the
crazy edifice, that the loudest rap would have been
inaudible to those within. He therefore entered,
without ceremony, and groped his way to the kitchen.
His intrusion, even there, was unnoticed. Peter
and Tabitha stood with their backs to the door,
stooping
over a large chest, which, apparently, they had
just dragged from a cavity, or concealed closet, on
the left side of the chimney. By the lamp in the old
woman's hand, Mr. Brown saw that the chest was
barred and clamped with iron, strengthened with iron
plates, and studded with iron nails, so as to be a fit
receptacle in which the wealth of one century might
be hoarded up for the wants of another. Peter
Goldthwaite
was inserting a key into the lock.
`Oh, Tabitha!' cried he, with tremulous rapture,
`how shall I endure the effulgence? The gold!
the bright, bright gold! Methinks I can remember
my last glance at it, just as the iron-plated lid fell
down. And ever since, being seventy years, it has
been blazing in secret, and gathering its splendor
against this glorious moment! It will flash upon us
like the noon-day sun!'
`Then shade your eyes, Mr. Peter!' said Tabitha,
with somewhat less patience than usual. `But, for
mercy's sake, do turn the key!'
And, with a strong effort of both hands, Peter did
force the rusty key through the intricacies of the
rusty lock. Mr. Brown, in the mean time, had drawn
near, and thrust his eager visage between those of
the other two, at the instant that Peter threw up the
lid. No sudden blaze illuminated the kitchen.
`What 's here?' exclaimed Tabitha, adjusting her
spectacles, and holding the lamp over the open chest.
`Old Peter Goldthwaite's hoard of old rags."
`Pretty much so, Tabby,' said Mr. Brown, lifting
a handful of the treasure.
Oh, what a ghost of dead and buried wealth had
Peter Goldthwaite raised, to scare himself out of his
scanty wits withal! Here was the semblance of an
incalculable sum, enough to purchase the whole town,
and build every street anew, but which, vast as it was,
no sane man would have given a solid sixpence for.
What then, in sober earnest, were the delusive
treasures
of the chest? Why, here were old provincial
bills of credit, and treasury notes, and bills of
land-banks
,
and all other bubbles of the sort, from the first
issue, above a century and a half ago, down nearly
to the Revolution. Bills of a thousand pounds were
intermixed with parchment pennies, and worth no
more than they.
`And this, then, is old Peter Goldthwaite's
treasure
!'
said John Brown. `Your namesake, Peter,
was something like yourself; and, when the
provincial
currency had depreciated fifty or seventy-five per
cent., he bought it up, in expectation of a rise. I
have heard my grandfather say, that old Peter gave
his father a mortgage of this very house and land, to
raise cash for his silly project. But the currency kept
sinking, till nobody would take it as a gift; and there
was old Peter Goldthwaite, like Peter the second,
with thousands in his strong-box, and hardly a coat to
his back. He went mad upon the strength of it.
But, never mind, Peter! It is just the sort of capital
for building castles in the air.'
`The house will be down about our ears!' cried
Tabitha, as the wind shook it with increasing
violence
.
`Let it fall!' said Peter, folding his arms, as he
seated himself upon the chest.
`No, no, my old friend Peter,' said John Brown.
`I have house-room for you and Tabby, and a safe
vault for the chest of treasure. To-morrow we will
try to come to an agreement about the sale of this
old house. Real estate is well up, and I could afford
you a pretty handsome price.'
`And I,' observed Peter Goldthwaite, with reviving
spirits, `have a plan for laying out the cash to great
advantage.'
`Why, as to that,' muttered John Brown to
himself
,
`we must apply to the next court for a
guardian
to take care of the solid cash; and if Peter insists
upon speculating, he may do it, to his heart's content,
with old
Peter Goldthwaite's Treasure.
'
CHIPPINGS WITH A CHISEL.
VOL. II. 16
Passing
a summer, several years since, at Edgartown,
on the island of Martha's Vineyard, I became
acquainted
with a certain carver of tomb-stones, who had
travelled
and voyaged thither from the interior of
Massachusetts
,
in search of professional employment. The
speculation had turned out so successful, that my friend
expected to transmute slate and marble into silver and
gold to the amount of at least a thousand dollars,
during the few months of his sojourn at Nantucket and
the Vineyard. The secluded life, and the simple and
primitive spirit which still characterizes the inhabitants
of those islands, especially of Martha's Vineyard,
insure their dead friends a longer and dearer
remembrance
than the daily novelty, and revolving bustle of
the world, can elsewhere afford to beings of the past.
Yet while every family is anxious to erect a
memorial
to its departed members, the untainted breath of
ocean bestows such health and length of days upon
the people of the isles, as would cause a melancholy
dearth of business to a resident artist in that line.
His own monument, recording his decease by
starvation
,
would probably be an early specimen of his skill.
Grave-stones, therefore, have generally been an article
of imported merchandise.
In my walks through the burial-ground of
Edgartown
where the dead have lain so long that the
soil, once enriched by their decay, has returned to its
original barrenness  in that ancient burial-ground I
noticed much variety of monumental sculpture. The
elder stones, dated a century back, or more, have
borders
elaborately carved with flowers, and are adorned
with a multiplicity of death's-heads, cross-bones,
scythes, hour-glasses, and other lugubrious emblems
of mortality, with here and there a winged cherub to
direct the mourner's spirit upward. These productions
of Gothic taste must have been quite beyond the
colonial
skill of the day, and were probably carved in
London, and brought across the ocean to
commemorate
the defunct worthies of this lonely isle. The
more recent monuments are mere slabs of slate, in
the ordinary style, without any superfluous flourishes
to set off the bald inscriptions. But others  and
those far the most impressive, both to my taste and
feelings  were roughly hewn from the gray rocks of
the island, evidently by the unskilled hands of
surviving
friends and relatives. On some there were
merely the initials of a name; some were inscribed
with misspelt prose or rhyme, in deep letters, which
the moss and wintry rain of many years had not been
able to obliterate. These, these were graves where
loved ones slept! It is an old theme of satire, the
falsehood and vanity of monumental eulogies; but
when affection and sorrow grave the letters with their
own painful labor, then we may be sure that they
copy from the record on their hearts.
My acquaintance, the sculptor  he may share
that title with Greenough, since the dauber of signs is
a painter as well as Raphael  had found a ready
market for all his blank slabs of marble, and full
occupation
in lettering and ornamenting them. He
was an elderly man, a descendant of the old Puritan
family of Wigglesworth, with a certain simplicity and
singleness, both of heart and mind, which, methinks,
is more rarely found among us Yankees than in any
other community of people. In spite of his gray head
and wrinkled brow, he was quite like a child in all
matters
save what had some reference to his own
business
;
he seemed, unless my fancy misled me, to view
mankind in no other relation than as people in want
of tomb-stones; and his literary attainments evidently
comprehended very little, either of prose or poetry,
which had not, at one time or other, been inscribed
on slate or marble. His sole task and office among
the immortal pilgrims of the tomb  the duty for
which Providence had sent the old man into the world,
as it were with a chisel in his hand  was to label the
dead bodies, lest their names should be forgotten at
the resurrection. Yet he had not failed, within a
narrow
scope, to gather a few sprigs of earthly, and more
than earthly, wisdom,  the harvest of many a grave.
And lugubrious as his calling might appear, he
was as cheerful an old soul as health, and integrity,
and lack of care, could make him, and used to set to
work upon one sorrowful inscription or another with
that sort of spirit which impels a man to sing at his
labor. On the whole, I found Mr. Wigglesworth an
entertaining, and often instructive, if not an
interesting
character; and partly for the charm of his
society
,
and still more because his work has an invariable
attraction for `man that is born of woman,' I was
accustomed
to spend some hours a day at his work-shop.
The quaintness of his remarks, and their not infrequent
truth  a truth condensed and pointed by the limited
sphere of his view  gave a raciness to his talk, which
mere worldliness and general cultivation would at
once have destroyed.
Sometimes we would discuss the respective merits
of the various qualities of marble, numerous slabs of
which were resting against the walls of the shop; or
sometimes an hour or two would pass quietly, without
a word on either side, while I watched how neatly his
chisel struck out letter after letter of the names of the
Nortons, the Mayhews, the Luces, the Daggets, and
other immemorial families of the Vineyard. Often,
with an artist's pride, the good old sculptor would
speak of favorite productions of his skill, which were
scattered throughout the village grave-yards of New
England. But my chief and most instructive
amusement
was to witness his interviews with his customers,
who held interminable consultations about the form and
fashion of the desired monuments, the buried
excellence
to be commemorated, the anguish to be
expressed
,
and finally, the lowest price in dollars and cents
for which a marble transcript of their feelings might be
obtained. Really, my mind received many fresh ideas,
which, perhaps, may remain in it even longer than
Mr. Wigglesworth's hardest marble will retain the
deepest strokes of his chisel.
An elderly lady came to bespeak a monument for
her first-love, who had been killed by a whale in the
Pacific Ocean no less than forty years before. It was
singular that so strong an impression of early feeling
should have survived through the changes of her
subsequent
life, in the course of which she had been a
wife and a mother, and, so far as I could judge, a
comfortable and happy woman. Reflecting within
myself
,
it appeared to me that this life-long sorrow  as,
in all good faith, she deemed it  was one of the most
fortunate circumstances of her history. It had given
an ideality to her mind; it had kept her purer and less
earthly than she would otherwise have been, by
drawing
a portion of her sympathies apart from earth.
Amid the throng of enjoyments, and the pressure of
worldly care, and all the warm materialism of this life,
she had communed with a vision, and had been the
better for such intercourse. Faithful to the husband
of her maturity, and loving him with a far more real
affection than she ever could have felt for this dream
of her girlhood, there had still been an imaginative
faith to the ocean-buried, so that an ordinary
character
had thus been elevated and refined. Her sighs
had been the breath of Heaven to her soul. The
good lady earnestly desired that the proposed
monument
should be ornamented with a carved border of
marine plants, intertwined with twisted sea-shells, such
as were probably waving over her lover's skeleton, or
strewn around it, in the far depths of the Pacific. But
Mr. Wigglesworth's chisel being inadequate to the task,
she was forced to content herself with a rose, hanging
its head from a broken stem. After her departure I
remarked that the symbol was none of the most apt.
`And yet,' said my friend the sculptor, embodying
in this image the thoughts that had been passing
through my own mind, `that broken rose has shed its
sweet smell through forty years of the good woman's
life.'
It was seldom that I could find such pleasant food
for contemplation as in the above instance. None of
the applicants, I think, affected me more disagreeably
than an old man who came, with his fourth wife
hanging
on his arm, to bespeak grave-stones for the three
former occupants of his marriage-bed. I watched with
some anxiety to see whether his remembrance of either
were more affectionate than of the other two, but could
discover no symptom of the kind. The three
monuments
were all to be of the same material and form,
and each decorated, in bas-relief, with two weeping
willows, one of these sympathetic trees bending over
its fellow, which was to be broken in the midst and
rest upon a sepulchral urn. This, indeed, was Mr.
Wigglesworth's standing emblem of conjugal
bereavement
.
I shuddered at the gray polygamist, who had so
utterly lost the holy sense of individuality in wedlock,
that methought he was fain to reckon upon his fingers
how many women, who had once slept by his side,
were now sleeping in their graves. There was even
if I wrong him it is no great matter  a glance
sidelong
at his living spouse, as if he were inclined to drive
a thriftier bargain by bespeaking four grave-stones in
a lot. I was better pleased with a rough old whaling
captain, who gave directions for a broad marble slab,
divided into two compartments, one of which was to
contain an epitaph on his deceased wife, and the other
to be left vacant, till death should engrave his own
name there. As is frequently the case among the
whalers of Martha's Vineyard, so much of this
storm-beaten
widower's life had been tossed away on distant
seas, that out of twenty years of matrimony he had
spent scarce three, and those at scattered intervals,
beneath
his own roof. Thus the wife of his youth, though
she died in his and her declining age, retained the
bridal
dew-drops fresh around her memory.
My observations gave me the idea, and Mr.
Wigglesworth
confirmed it, that husbands were more
faithful
in setting up memorials to their dead wives than
widows to their dead husbands. I was not ill-natured
enough to fancy that women, less than men, feel so
sure of their own constancy as to be willing to give a
pledge of it in marble. It is more probably the fact,
that while men are able to reflect upon their lost
companions
as remembrances apart from themselves;
women
,
on the other hand, are conscious that a portion of
their being has gone with the departed whithersoever
he has gone. Soul clings to soul; the living dust has
a sympathy with the dust of the grave; and, by the
very strength of that sympathy, the wife of the dead
shrinks the more sensitively from reminding the world
of its existence. The link is already strong enough;
it needs no visible symbol. And, though a shadow
walks ever by her side, and the touch of a chill hand
is on her bosom, yet life, and perchance its natural
yearnings, may still be warm within her, and inspire
her with new hopes of happiness. Then would she
mark out the grave, the scent of which would be
perceptible
on the pillow of the second bridal? No
but rather level its green mound with the surrounding
earth, as if, when she dug up again her buried heart,
the spot had ceased to be a grave. Yet, in spite of
these sentimentalities, I was prodigiously amused by
an incident of which I had not the good fortune to be
a witness, but which Mr. Wigglesworth related with
considerable humor. A gentlewoman of the town,
receiving news of her husband's loss at sea, had
bespoken
a handsome slab of marble, and came daily to
watch the progress of my friend's chisel. One
afternoon
,
when the good lady and the sculptor were in the
very midst of the epitaph, which the departed spirit
might have been greatly comforted to read, who
should walk into the work-shop but the deceased
himself
,
in substance as well as spirit! He had been
picked up at sea, and stood in no present need of
tombstone
or epitaph.
`And how,' inquired I, `did his wife bear the shock
of joyful surprise?'
`Why,' said the old man, deepening the grin of a
death's head, on which his chisel was just then
employed
,
`I really felt for the poor woman; it was
one of my best pieces of marble  and to be thrown
away on a living man!'
A comely woman, with a pretty rose-bud of a
daughter, came to select a grave-stone for a
twin-daughter
,
who had died a month before. I was
impressed
with the different nature of their feelings for
the dead; the mother was calm and woefully resigned,
fully conscious of her loss, as of a treasure which she
had not always possessed, and therefore had been
aware that it might be taken from her; but the
daughter
evidently had no real knowledge of what death's
doings were. Her thoughts knew, but not her heart.
It seemed to me, that by the print and pressure which
the dead sister had left upon the survivor's spirit, her
feelings were almost the same as if she still stood side
by side, and arm in arm, with the departed, looking at
the slabs of marble; and once or twice she glanced
around with a sunny smile, which, as its sister-smile had
faded forever, soon grew confusedly overshadowed.
Perchance her consciousness was truer than her
reflection
perchance her dead sister was a closer
companion
than in life. The mother and daughter talked
a long while with Mr. Wigglesworth about a suitable
epitaph, and finally chose an ordinary verse of
ill-matched
rhymes, which had already been inscribed
upon innumerable tomb-stones. But, when we
ridicule
the triteness of monumental verses, we forget
that Sorrow reads far deeper in them than we can,
and finds a profound and individual purport in what
seems so vague and inexpressive, unless interpreted
by her. She makes the epitaph anew, though the
selfsame
words may have served for a thousand graves.
`And yet,' said I afterwards to Mr. Wigglesworth,
`they might have made a better choice than this.
While you were discussing the subject, I was struck
by at least a dozen simple and natural expressions
from the lips of both mother and daughter. One of
these would have formed an inscription equally
original
and appropriate.'
`No, no,' replied the sculptor, shaking his head,
`there is a good deal of comfort to be gathered from
these little old scraps of poetry; and so I always
recommend
them in preference to any new-fangled ones.
And somehow, they seem to stretch to suit a great
grief, and shrink to fit a small one.'
It was not seldom that ludicrous images were
excited
by what took place between Mr. Wigglesworth and
his customers. A shrewd gentlewoman, who kept a
tavern in the town, was anxious to obtain two or three
grave-stones for the deceased members of her family,
and to pay for these solemn commodities by taking the
sculptor to board. Hereupon a fantasy arose in my
mind, of good Mr. Wigglesworth sitting down to
dinner
at a broad, flat tomb-stone, carving one of his own
plump little marble cherubs, gnawing a pair of
crossbones
,
and drinking out of a hollow death's-head, or
perhaps a lacrymatory vase, or sepulchral urn; while
his hostess's dead children waited on him at the ghastly
banquet. On communicating this nonsensical picture
to the old man, he laughed heartily, and pronounced
my humor to be of the right sort.
`I have lived at such a table all my days,' said he,
`and eaten no small quantity of slate and marble.'
`Hard fare!' rejoined I, smiling; `but you seemed
to have found it excellent of digestion, too.'
A man of fifty, or thereabouts, with a harsh,
unpleasant
countenance, ordered a stone for the grave of
his bitter enemy, with whom he had waged warfare
half a lifetime, to their mutual misery and ruin. The
secret of this phenomenon was, that hatred had become
the sustenance and enjoyment of the poor wretch's
soul; it had supplied the place of all kindly affections;
it had been really a bond of sympathy between
himself
and the man who shared the passion; and when
its object died, the unappeasable foe was the only
mourner for the dead. He expressed a purpose of
being buried side by side with his enemy.
`I doubt whether their dust will mingle,' remarked
the old sculptor to me; for often there was an
earthliness
in his conceptions.
`Oh yes,' replied I, who had mused long upon the
incident; `and when they rise again, these bitter foes
may find themselves dear friends. Methinks what they
mistook for hatred was but love under a mask.'
A gentleman of antiquarian propensities provided a
memorial for an Indian of Chabbiquidick, one of the
few of untainted blood remaining in that region, and
said to be an hereditary chieftain, descended from the
sachem who welcomed Govenor Mayhew to the
Vineyard
.
Mr. Wigglesworth exerted his best skill to
carve a broken bow and scattered sheaf of arrows,
in memory of the hunters and warriors whose race
was ended here; but he likewise sculptured a cherub,
to denote that the poor Indian had shared the
Christian's
hope of immortality.
`Why,' observed I, taking a perverse view of the
winged boy and the bow and arrows, `it looks more
like Cupid's tomb than an Indian chief's!'
`You talk nonsense,' said the sculptor, with the
offended pride of art; he then added with his usual
good-nature, `how can Cupid die when there are such
pretty maidens in the Vineyard?'
`Very true,' answered I,  and for the rest of the
day I thought of other matters than tomb-stones.
At our next meeting I found him chiseling an open
book upon a marble head-stone, and concluded that it
was meant to express the erudition of some
black-letter
clergyman of the Cotton Mather school. It
turned out, however, to be emblematical of the
scriptural
knowledge of an old woman who had never read
any thing but her Bible; and the monument was a
tribute to her piety and good works, from the Orthodox
Church, of which she had been a member. In strange
contrast with this Christian woman's memorial, was
that of an infidel, whose grave-stone, by his own
direction
,
bore an avowal of his belief that the spirit
within him would be extinguished like a flame, and
that the nothingness whence he sprang would receive
him again. Mr. Wigglesworth consulted me as to the
propriety of enabling a dead man's dust to utter this
dreadful creed.
`If I thought,' said he, `that a single mortal would
read the inscription without a shudder, my chisel
should never cut a letter of it. But when the grave
speaks such falsehoods, the soul of man will know the
truth by its own horror.'
`So it will,' said I, struck by the idea: `the poor
infidel may strive to preach blasphemies from his
grave; but it will be only another method of
impressing
the soul with a consciousness of immortality.'
There was an old man by the name of Norton, noted
throughout the island for his great wealth, which he
had accumulated by the exercise of strong and shrewd
faculties, combined with a most penurious disposition.
This wretched miser, conscious that he had not a
friend to be mindful of him in his grave, had himself
taken the needful precautions for posthumous
remembrance
,
by bespeaking an immense slab of white
marble
,
with a long epitaph in raised letters, the whole to
be as magnificent as Mr. Wigglesworth's skill could
make it. There was something very characteristic in
this contrivance to have his money's worth even from
his own tomb-stone, which, indeed, afforded him more
enjoyment in the few months that he lived thereafter,
than it probably will in a whole century, now that it
is laid over his bones. This incident reminds me of
a young girl, a pale, slender, feeble creature, most
unlike the other rosy and healthful damsels of the
Vineyard, amid whose brightness she was fading away.
Day after day did the poor maiden come to the
sculptor's
shop, and pass from one piece of marble to
another
,
till at last she penciled her name upon a
slender
slab, which, I think, was of a more spotless white
than all the rest. I saw her no more, but soon
afterwards
found Mr. Wigglesworth cutting her virgin name
into the stone which she had chosen.
`She is dead  poor girl,' said he, interrupting the
tune which he was whistling, `and she chose a good
piece of stuff for her head-stone. Now which of
these slabs would you like best to see your own name
upon?'
`Why, to tell you the truth, my good Mr.
Wigglesworth
,'
replied I, after a moment's pause,  for the
abruptness of the question had somewhat startled me,
`to be quite sincere with you, I care little or
nothing
about a stone for my own grave, and am
somewhat
inclined to skepticism as to the propriety of
erecting monuments at all, over the dust that once
was human. The weight of these heavy marbles,
though unfelt by the dead corpse or the enfranchised
soul, presses drearily upon the spirit of the survivor,
and causes him to connect the idea of death with the
dungeon-like imprisonment of the tomb, instead of
with the freedom of the skies. Every grave-stone
that you ever made is the visible symbol of a
mistaken
system. Our thoughts should soar upward with
the butterfly  not linger with the exuvi that
confined
him. In truth and reason, neither those whom
we call the living, and still less the departed, have
any thing to do with the grave.'
`I never heard anything so heathenish!' said Mr.
Wigglesworth, perplexed and displeased at sentiments
which controverted all his notions and feelings, and
implied the utter waste, and worse, of his whole life's
labor,  `would you forget your dead friends, the
moment they are under the sod!'
`They are not under the sod,' I rejoined; `then
why should I mark the spot where there is no treasure
hidden! Forget them? No! But to remember them
aright, I would forget what they have cast off. And
to gain the truer conception of DEATH, I would forget
the GRAVE!'
But still the good old sculptor murmured, and
stumbled
,
as it were, over the grave-stones amid which he
had walked through life. Whether he were right or
wrong, I had grown the wiser from our
companionship
and from my observations of nature and
character
,
as displayed by those who came, with their old
griefs or their new ones, to get them recorded upon
his slabs of marble. And yet, with my gain of
wisdom
,
I had likewise gained perplexity; for there was
a strange doubt in my mind, whether the dark
shadowing
of this life, the sorrows and regrets, have not as
much real comfort in them  leaving religious
influences
out of the question  as what we term life's
joys.
VOL. II. 17
THE SHAKER BRIDAL.
One
day, in the sick chamber of Father Ephraim,
who had been forty years the presiding elder over the
Shaker settlement at Goshen, there was an
assemblage
of several of the chief men of the sect.
Individuals
had come from the rich establishment at
Lebanon, from Canterbury, Harvard, and Alfred, and
from all the other localities, where this strange people
have fertilized the rugged hills of New England by
their systematic industry. An elder was likewise
there, who had made a pilgrimage of a thousand
miles from a village of the faithful in Kentucky, to
visit his spiritual kindred, the children of the sainted
Mother Ann. He had partaken of the homely
abundance
of their tables, had quaffed the far-famed
Shaker cider, and had joined in the sacred dance,
every step of which is believed to alienate the
enthusiast
from earth, and bear him onward to heavenly
purity and bliss. His brethren of the north had now
courteously invited him to be present on an occasion,
when the concurrence of every eminent member of
their community was peculiarly desirable.
The venerable Father Ephraim sat in his
easy-chair
,
not only hoary-headed and infirm with age,
but worn down by a lingering disease, which, it was
evident, would very soon transfer his patriarchal staff
to other hands. At his footstool stood a man and
woman
,
both clad in the Shaker garb.
`My brethren,' said Father Ephraim to the
surrounding
elders, feebly exerting himself to utter these
few words, `here are the son and daughter to whom
I would commit the trust, of which Providence is
about to lighten my weary shoulders. Read their
faces, I pray you, and say whether the inward
movement
of the spirit hath guided my choice aright.'
Accordingly, each elder looked at the two
candidates
with a most scrutinizing gaze. The man,
whose name was Adam Colburn, had a face sunburnt
with labor in the fields, yet intelligent, thoughtful,
and traced with cares enough for a whole lifetime,
though he had barely reached middle age. There
was something severe in his aspect, and a rigidity
throughout his person, characteristics that caused him
generally to be taken for a schoolmaster; which
vocation
,
in fact, he had formerly exercised for several
years. The woman, Martha Pierson, was somewhat
above thirty, thin and pale, as a Shaker sister almost
invariably is, and not entirely free from that
corpse-like
appearance, which the garb of the sisterhood is
so well calculated to impart.
`This pair are still in the summer of their years,'
observed the elder from Harvard, a shrewd old man.
`I would like better to see the hoar frost of autumn
on their heads. Methinks, also, they will be exposed
to peculiar temptations, on account of the carnal
desires
which have heretofore subsisted between them.
`Nay, brother,' said the elder from Canterbury,
`the hoar frost, and the black frost, hath done its
work on Brother Adam and Sister Martha, even as
we sometimes discern its traces in our cornfields,
while they are yet green. And why should we
question
the wisdom of our venerable Father's purpose,
although this pair, in their early youth, have loved
one another as the world's people love? Are there
not many brethren and sisters among us, who have
lived long together in wedlock, yet, adopting our
faith, find their hearts purified from all but spiritual
affection?'
Whether or no the early loves of Adam and
Martha
had rendered it inexpedient that they should now
preside together over a Shaker village, it was
certainly
most singular that such should be the final
result
of many warm and tender hopes. Children of
neighboring families, their affection was older even
than their school-days; it seemed an innate principle,
interfused among all their sentiments and feelings,
and not so much a distinct remembrance, as
connected
with their whole volume of remembrances. But,
just as they reached a proper age for their union,
misfortunes had fallen heavily on both, and made it
necessary that they should resort to personal labor for
a bare subsistence. Even under these circumstances,
Martha Pierson would probably have consented to
unite her fate with Adam Colburn's, and, secure of
the bliss of mutual love, would patiently have awaited
the less important gifts of fortune. But Adam, being
of a calm and cautious character, was loath to
relinquish
the advantages which a single man possesses
for raising himself in the world. Year after year,
therefore, their marriage had been deferred. Adam
Colburn had followed many vocations, had travelled
far, and seen much of the world and of life. Martha
had earned her bread sometimes as a sempstress,
sometimes as help to a farmer's wife, sometimes
as schoolmistress of the village children, sometimes
as a nurse or watcher of the sick, thus acquiring
a varied experience, the ultimate use of which she
little anticipated. But nothing had gone prosperously
with either of the lovers; at no subsequent moment
would matrimony have been so prudent a measure,
as when they had first parted, in the opening bloom
of life, to seek a better fortune. Still they had held
fast their mutual faith. Martha might have been the
wife of a man, who sat among the senators of his
native
state, and Adam could have won the hand, as he
had unintentionally won the heart, of a rich and
comely widow. But neither of them desired good
fortune
,
save to share it with the other.
At length that calm despair which occurs only in
a strong and somewhat stubborn character, and yields
to no second spring of hope, settled down on the
spirit of Adam Colburn. He sought an interview
with Martha, and proposed that they should join the
Society of Shakers. The converts of this sect are
oftener driven within its hospitable gates by worldly
misfortune, than drawn thither by fanaticism, and are
received without inquisition as to their motives.
Martha
,
faithful still, had placed her hand in that of her
lover and accompanied him to the Shaker village.
Here the natural capacity of each, cultivated and
strengthened by the difficulties of their previous lives,
had soon gained them an important rank in the
Society
,
whose members are generally below the
ordinary
standard of intelligence. Their faith and
feelings
had, in some degree, become assimilated to those
of their fellow-worshipers. Adam Colburn gradually
acquired reputation, not only in the management of
the temporal affairs of the Society, but as a clear and
efficient preacher of their doctrines. Martha was not
less distinguished in the duties proper to her sex.
Finally, when the infirmities of Father Ephraim had
admonished him to seek a successor in his patriarchal
office, he thought of Adam and Martha, and
proposed
to renew, in their persons, the primitive form
of Shaker government, as established by Mother Ann.
They were to be the Father and Mother of the
village
.
The simple ceremony, which would constitute
them such, was now to be performed.
`Son Adam, and daughter Martha,' said the
venerable
Father Ephraim, fixing his aged eyes piercingly
upon them, `if ye can conscientiously undertake this
charge, speak, that the brethren may not doubt of
your fitness.'
`Father,' replied Adam, speaking with the
calmness
of his character, `I came to your village a
disappointed
man, weary of the world, worn out with
continual trouble, seeking only a security against evil
fortune, as I had no hope of good. Even my wishes
of worldly success were almost dead within me. I
came hither as a man might come to a tomb, willing
to lie down in its gloom and coldness, for the sake of
its peace and quiet. There was but one earthly
affection in my breast, and it had grown calmer since
my youth; so that I was satisfied to bring Martha to
be my sister, in our new abode. We are brother and
sister; nor would I have it otherwise. And in this
peaceful village I have found all that I hope for,  all
that I desire. I will strive, with my best strength, for
the spiritual and temporal good of our community.
My conscience is not doubtful in this matter. I am
ready to receive the trust.'
`Thou hast spoken well, son Adam,' said the
Father
.
`God will bless thee in the office which I am
about to resign.'
`But our sister!' observed the elder from
Harvard
;
`hath she not likewise a gift to declare her
sentiments!'
Martha started, and moved her lips, as if she would
have made a formal reply to this appeal. But, had
she attempted it, perhaps the old recollections, the
long-repressed feelings of childhood, youth, and
womanhood
,
might have gushed from her heart, in words
that it would have been profanation to utter there.
`Adam has spoken,' said she, hurriedly; `his
sentiments
are likewise mine.'
But while speaking these few words, Martha grew
so pale that she looked fitter to be laid in her coffin,
than to stand in the presence of Father Ephraim and
the elders; she shuddered, also, as if there were
something awful or horrible in her situation and
destiny
.
It required, indeed, a more than feminine
strength of nerve, to sustain the fixed observance of
men so exalted and famous throughout the sect, as
these were. They had overcome their natural
sympathy
with human frailties and affections. One,
when he joined the Society, had brought with him his
wife and children, but never, from that hour, had
spoken a fond word to the former, or taken his
best-loved
child upon his knee. Another, whose family
refused to follow him, had been enabled,  such was
his gift of holy fortitude,  to leave them to the
mercy of the world. The youngest of the elders, a
man of about fifty, had been bred from infancy in a
Shaker village, and was said never to have clasped a
woman's hand in his own, and to have no conception
of a closer tie than the cold fraternal one of the sect.
Old Father Ephraim was the most awful character of
all. In his youth, he had been a dissolute libertine,
but was converted by Mother Ann herself, and had
partaken of the wild fanaticism of the early Shakers.
Tradition whispered, at the firesides of the village,
that Mother Ann had been compelled to sear his heart
of flesh with a red-hot iron, before it could be
purified
from earthly passions.
However that might be, poor Martha had a
woman's
heart, and a tender one, and it quailed within
her as she looked round at those strange old men, and
from them to the calm features of Adam Colburn.
But perceiving that the elders eyed her doubtfully,
she gasped for breath, and again spoke.
`With what strength is left me by my many
troubles
,'
said she, `I am ready to undertake this charge,
and to do my best in it.'
`My children, join your hands,' said Father
Ephraim.
They did so. The elders stood up around, and the
Father feebly raised himself to a more erect position,
but continued sitting in his great chair.
`I have bidden you to join your hands,' said he,
`not in earthly affection, for ye have cast off its
chains for ever; but as brother and sister in
spiritual
love, and helpers of one another in your allotted
task. Teach unto others the faith which ye have
received
.
Open wide your gates,  I deliver you the
keys thereof,  open them wide to all who will give
up the iniquities of the world, and come hither to
lead lives of purity and peace. Receive the weary
ones, who have known the vanity of earth,  receive
the little children, that they may never learn that
miserable
lesson. And a blessing be upon your labors;
so that the time may hasten on, when the mission of
Mother Ann shall have wrought its full effect,
when children shall no more be born and die, and
the last survivor of mortal race, some old and weary
man like me, shall see the sun go down, never more
to rise on a world of sin and sorrow!'
The aged Father sank back exhausted and the
surrounding
elders deemed, with good reason, that the
hour was come, when the new heads of the village
must enter on their patriarchal duties. In their
attention
to Father Ephraim, their eyes were turned from
Martha Pierson, who grew paler and paler, unnoticed
even by Adam Colburn. He, indeed, had withdrawn
his hand from hers, and folded his arms with a sense
of satisfied ambition. But paler and paler grew
Martha
by his side, till, like a corpse in its burial clothes,
she sank down at the feet of her early lover; for,
after many trials firmly borne, her heart could endure
the weight of its desolate agony no longer.
NIGHT SKETCHES,
BENEATH AN UMBRELLA.
Pleasant
is a rainy winter's day, within doors!
The best study for such a day, or the best amusement,
call it which you will,  is a book of travels,
describing
scenes the most unlike that sombre one,
which is mistily presented through the windows. I
have experienced, that fancy is then most successful
in imparting distinct shapes and vivid colors to the
objects which the author has spread upon his page,
and that his words become magic spells to summon
up a thousand varied pictures. Strange landscapes
glimmer through the familiar walls of the room, and
outlandish figures thrust themselves almost within the
sacred precincts of the hearth. Small as my
chamber
is, it has space enough to contain the ocean-like
circumference of an Arabian desert, its parched
sands tracked by the long line of a caravan, with the
camels patiently journeying through the heavy
sunshine
.
Though my ceiling be not lofty, yet I can
pile up the mountains of Central Asia beneath it, till
their summits shine far above the clouds of the
middle
atmosphere. And, with my humble means, a
wealth that is not taxable, I can transport hither the
magnificent merchandise of an Oriental bazaar, and
call a crowd of purchasers from distant countries, to
pay a fair profit for the precious articles which are
displayed on all sides. True it is, however, that amid
the bustle of traffic, or whatever else may seem to
be going on around me, the rain-drops will
occasionally
be heard to patter against my window-panes,
which look forth upon one of the quietest streets in a
New England town. After a time, too, the visions
vanish, and will not appear again at my bidding.
Then, it being nightfall, a gloomy sense of unreality
depresses my spirits, and impels me to venture out,
before the clock shall strike bedtime, to satisfy
myself
that the world is not entirely made up of such
shadowy materials, as have busied me throughout the
day. A dreamer may dwell so long among fantasies,
that the things without him will seem as unreal as
those within.
When eve has fairly set in, therefore, I sally forth,
tightly buttoning my shaggy over-coat, and hoisting
my umbrella, the silken dome of which immediately
resounds with the heavy drumming of the invisible
rain-drops. Pausing on the lowest door-step, I
contrast
the warmth and cheerfulness of my deserted
fireside, with the drear obscurity and chill discomfort,
into which I am about to plunge. Now come fearful
auguries, innumerable as the drops of rain. Did not
VOL. II. 18
my manhood cry shame upon me, I should turn back
within doors, resume my elbow-chair, my slippers,
and my book, pass such an evening of sluggish
enjoyment
as the day has been, and go to bed inglorious.
The same shivering reluctance, no doubt, has quelled,
for a moment, the adventurous spirit of many a
traveller
,
when his feet, which were destined to measure
the earth around, were leaving their last tracks in the
home-paths.
In my own case, poor human nature may be allowed
a few misgivings. I look upward, and discern no sky,
not even an unfathomable void, but only a black,
impenetrable
nothingness, as though heaven and all its
lights were blotted from the system of the universe.
It is as if nature were dead, and the world had put
on black, and the clouds were weeping for her. With
their tears upon my cheek, I turn my eyes earthward,
but find little consolation here below. A lamp is
burning dimly at the distant corner, and throws just
enough of light along the street, to show, and
exaggerate
by so faintly showing, the perils and
difficulties
which beset my path. Yonder dingily white
remnant of a huge snowbank,  which will yet
cumber
the sidewalk till the latter days of March,  over
or through that wintry waste must I stride onward.
Beyond, lies a certain Slough of Despond, a concoction
of mud and liquid filth, ankle-deep, leg-deep,
neck-deep
,
in a word, of unknown bottom,  on which
the lamp-light does not even glimmer, but which I
have occasionally watched, in the gradual growth of
its horrors, from morn till nightfall. Should I
flounder
into its depths, farewell to upper earth! And
hark! how roughly resounds the roaring of a stream,
the turbulent career of which is partially reddened
by the gleam of the lamp, but elsewhere brawls
noisily through the densest gloom. Oh, should I be
swept away in fording that impetuous and unclean
torrent, the coroner will have a job with an
unfortunate
gentleman, who would fain end his troubles
anywhere
but in a mud-puddle!
Pshaw! I will linger not another instant at arm's
length from these dim terrors, which grow more
obscurely
formidable, the longer I delay to grapple with
them. Now for the onset! And lo! with little
damage
,
save a dash of rain in the face and breast, a
splash of mud high up the pantaloons, and the left
boot full of ice-cold water, behold me at the corner
of the street. The lamp throws down a circle of
red light around me; and, twinkling onward from
corner to corner, I discern other beacons, marshalling
my way to a brighter scene. But this is a lonesome
and dreary spot. The tall edifices bid gloomy
defiance
to the storm, with their blinds all closed, even
as a man winks when he faces a spattering gust.
How loudly tinkles the collected rain down the tin
spouts! The puffs of wind are boisterous, and seem
to assail me from various quarters at once. I have
often observed that this corner is a haunt and
loitering-place
for those winds which have no work to
do upon the deep, dashing ships against our
iron-bound
shores; nor in the forest, tearing up the sylvan
giants with half a rood of soil at their vast roots.
Here they amuse themselves with lesser freaks of
mischief. See, at this moment, how they assail
yonder
poor woman, who is passing just within the verge
of the lamp-light! One blast struggles for her
umbrella
,
and turns it wrong side outward; another
whisks the cape of her cloak across her eyes; while
a third takes most unwarrantable liberties with the
lower part of her attire. Happily, the good dame is
no gossamer, but a figure of rotundity and fleshly
substance; else would these arial tormentors whirl
her aloft, like a witch upon a broomstick, and set her
down, doubtless, in the filthiest kennel hereabout.
From hence I tread upon firm pavements into the
centre of the town. Here there is almost as brilliant
an illumination as when some great victory has been
won, either on the battle-field or at the polls. Two
rows of shops, with windows down nearly to the
ground, cast a glow from side to side, while the black
night hangs overhead like a canopy, and thus keeps
the splendor from diffusing itself away. The wet
side-walks gleam with a broad sheet of red light.
The rain-drops glitter, as if the sky were pouring
down rubies. The spouts gush with fire. Methinks
the scene is an emblem of the deceptive glare, which
mortals throw around their footsteps in the moral
world, thus bedazzling themselves, till they forget the
impenetrable obscurity that hems them in, and that can
be dispelled only by radiance from above. And, after
all, it is a cheerless scene, and cheerless are the
wanderers
in it. Here comes one who has so long been
familiar with tempestuous weather that he takes the
bluster of the storm for a friendly greeting, as if it
should say, `How fare ye, brother?' He is a retired
sea-captain, wrapped in some nameless garment of
the pea-jacket order, and is now laying his course
towards the Marine Insurance Office, there to spin
yarns of gale and ship-wreck, with a crew of old
sea-dogs like himself. The blast will put in its word
among their hoarse voices, and be understood by all
of them. Next I meet an unhappy slip-shod
gentleman
,
with a cloak flung hastily over his shoulders,
running a race with boisterous winds, and striving
to glide between the drops of rain. Some domestic
emergency or other has blown this miserable man
from his warm fireside, in quest of a doctor! See
that little vagabond,  how carelessly he has taken
his stand right underneath a spout, while staring at
some object of curiosity in a shop-window! Surely
the rain is his native element; he must have fallen
with it from the clouds, as frogs are supposed to do.
Here is a picture, and a pretty one. A young
man and a girl, both enveloped in cloaks, and
huddled
beneath the scanty protection of a cotton
umbrella
.
She wears rubber over-shoes; but he is in his
dancing-pumps; and they are on their way, no doubt,
to some cotillon-party, or subscription-ball at a dollar
a head, refreshments included. Thus they struggle
against the gloomy tempest, lured onward by a vision
of festal splendor. But, ah! a most lamentable disaster.
Bewildered by the red, blue, and yellow meteors, in
an apothecary's window, they have stepped upon a
slippery remnant of ice, and are precipitated into a
confluence of swollen floods, at the corner of two
streets. Luckless lovers! Were it my nature to be
other than a looker-on in life, I would attempt your
rescue. Since that may not be, I vow, should you be
drowned, to weave such a pathetic story of your fate,
as shall call forth tears enough to drown you both
anew. Do ye touch bottom, my young friends?
Yes; they emerge like a water-nymph and a
river-deity
,
and paddle hand-in-hand out of the depths of
the dark pool. They hurry homeward, dripping,
disconsolate
,
abashed, but with love too warm to be
chilled by the cold water. They have stood a test
which proves too strong for many. Faithful, though
over head and ears in trouble!
Onward I go, deriving a sympathetic joy or sorrow
from the varied aspect of mortal affairs, even as my
figure catches a gleam from the lighted windows, or
is blackened by an interval of darkness. Not that
mine is altogether a chameleon spirit, with no hue
of its own. Now I pass into a more retired street,
where the dwellings of wealth and poverty are
intermingled
,
presenting a range of strongly contrasted
pictures. Here, too, may be found the golden mean.
Through yonder casement I discern a family circle,
the grandmother, the parents, and the children,
all flickering, shadow-like, in the glow of a wood-fire.
Bluster, fierce blast, and beat, thou wintry rain, against
the window-panes! Ye cannot damp the enjoyment
of that fireside. Surely my fate is hard, that I should
be wandering homeless here, taking to my bosom
night, and storm, and solitude, instead of wife and
children. Peace, murmurer! Doubt not that darker
guests are sitting round the hearth, though the warm
blaze hides all but blissful images. Well; here is
still a brighter scene. A stately mansion, illuminated
for a ball, with cut-glass chandeliers and alabaster
lamps in every room, and sunny landscapes hanging
round the walls. See! a coach has stopped, whence
emerges a slender beauty, who, canopied by two
umbrellas
,
glides within the portal, and vanishes amid
lightsome thrills of music. Will she ever feel the
night-wind and the rain? Perhaps,  perhaps! And
will Death and Sorrow ever enter that proud
mansion
!
As surely as the dancers will be gay within
its halls to-night. Such thoughts sadden, yet satisfy
my heart; for they teach me that the poor man, in
this mean, weather-beaten hovel, without a fire to
cheer him, may call the rich his brother,  brethren
by Sorrow, who must be an inmate of both their
households,  brethren by Death, who will lead them
both to other homes.
Onward, still onward, I plunge into the night.
Now have I reached the utmost limits of the town,
where the last lamp struggles feebly with the
darkness
,
like the furthest star that stands sentinel on the
borders of uncreated space. It is strange what
sensations
of sublimity may spring from a very humble
source. Such are suggested by this hollow roar of a
subterranean cataract, where the mighty stream of a
kennel precipitates itself beneath an iron grate, and
is seen no more on earth. Listen awhile to its voice
of mystery; and fancy will magnify it, till you start,
and smile at the illusion. And now another sound,
the rumbling of wheels,  as the mail-coach,
outward
bound, rolls heavily off the pavements, and
splashes through the mud and water of the road. All
night long, the poor passengers will be tossed to and
fro between drowsy watch and troubled sleep, and
will dream of their own quiet beds, and awake to
find themselves still jolting onward. Happier my lot,
who will straightway hie me to my familiar room, and
toast myself comfortably before the fire, musing, and
fitfully dozing, and fancying a strangeness in such
sights as all may see. But first let me gaze at this
solitary figure, who comes hitherward with a tin
lantern
,
which throws the circular pattern of its punched
holes on the ground about him. He passes fearlessly
into the unknown gloom, whither I will not follow
him.
This figure shall supply me with a moral,
wherewith
,
for lack of a more appropriate one, I may wind
up my sketch. He fears not to tread the dreary path
before him, because his lantern, which was kindled at
the fireside of his home, will light him back to that
same fireside again. And thus we, night-wanderers
through a stormy and dismal world, if we bear the
lamp of Faith, enkindled at a celestial fire, it will
surely lead us home to that Heaven whence its
radiance
was borrowed.
ENDICOTT AND THE RED CROSS.
At
noon of an autumnal day, more than two
centuries
ago, the English colors were displayed by the
standard-bearer of the Salem trainband, which had
mustered for martial exercise under the orders of
John Endicott. It was a period, when the religious
exiles were accustomed often to buckle on their
armor
,
and practise the handling of their weapons of
war. Since the first settlement of New England, its
prospects had never been so dismal. The dissensions
between Charles the First and his subjects were then,
and for several years afterwards, confined to the floor
of Parliament. The measures of the King and
ministry
were rendered more tyrannically violent by an
opposition, which had not yet acquired sufficient
confidence
in its own strength, to resist royal injustice
with the sword. The bigoted and haughty primate,
Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, controlled the
religious
affairs of the realm, and was consequently
invested
with powers which might have wrought the
utter ruin of the two Puritan colonies, Plymouth and
Massachusetts. There is evidence on record, that
our forefathers perceived their danger, but were
resolved
that their infant country should not fall without
a struggle, even beneath the giant strength of the
King's right arm.
Such was the aspect of the times, when the folds
of the English banner, with the Red Cross in its
field, were flung out over a company of Puritans.
Their leader, the famous Endicott, was a man of
stern and resolute countenance, the effect of which
was heightened by a grizzled beard that swept the
upper portion of his breastplate. This piece of
armor
was so highly polished, that the whole
surrounding
scene had its image in the glittering steel. The
central object in the mirrored picture, was an edifice
of humble architecture, with neither steeple nor bell
to proclaim it,  what nevertheless it was,  the
house of prayer. A token of the perils of the
wilderness
was seen in the grim head of a wolf, which
had just been slain within the precincts of the town,
and, according to the regular mode of claiming the
bounty, was nailed on the porch of the
meeting-house
.
The blood was still plashing on the
doorstep
.
There happened to be visible, at the same
noontide hour, so many other characteristics of the
times and manners of the Puritans, that we must
endeavor
to represent them in a sketch, though far less
vividly than they were reflected in the polished
breastplate
of John Endicott.
In close vicinity to the sacred edifice appeared that
important engine of Puritanic authority, the
whipping-post
,
with the soil around it well trodden by the
feet of evil-doers, who had there been disciplined.
At one corner of the meetinghouse was the pillory,
and at the other the stocks; and, by a singular good
fortune for our sketch, the head of an Episcopalian
and suspected Catholic was grotesquely encased in
the former machine; while a fellow-criminal, who
had boisterously quaffed a health to the King, was
confined by the legs in the latter. Side by side, on
the meetinghouse steps, stood a male and a female
figure. The man was a tall, lean, haggard
personification
of fanaticism, bearing on his breast this label,
A
Wanton Gospeller,
which betokened that
he had dared to give interpretations of Holy Writ,
unsanctioned by the infallible judgment of the civil
and religious rulers. His aspect showed no lack of
zeal to maintain his heterodoxies, even at the stake.
The woman wore a cleft stick on her tongue, in
appropriate
retribution for having wagged that unruly
member
against the elders of the church; and her
countenance
and gestures gave much cause to apprehend,
that, the moment the stick should be removed, a
repetition
of the offence would demand new ingenuity in
chastising it.
The above-mentioned individuals had been
sentenced
to undergo their various modes of ignominy,
for the space of one hour at noonday. But among
the crowd were several, whose punishment would be
life-long; some, whose ears had been cropt, like
those of puppy-dogs; others, whose cheeks had been
branded with the initials of their misdemeanors; one,
with his nostrils slit and seared; and another, with a
halter about his neck, which he was forbidden ever to
take off, or to conceal beneath his garments.
Methinks
he must have been grievously tempted to affix
the other end of the rope to some convenient beam or
bough. There was likewise a young woman, with
no mean share of beauty, whose doom it was to wear
the letter A on the breast of her gown, in the eyes of
all the world and her own children. And even her
own children knew what that initial signified.
Sporting
with her infamy, the lost and desperate creature
had embroidered the fatal token in scarlet cloth, with
golden thread and the nicest art of needle-work; so
that the capital A might have been thought to mean
Admirable, or any thing rather than Adulteress.
Let not the reader argue, from any of these
evidences
of iniquity, that the times of the Puritans were
more vicious than our own, when, as we pass along
the very street of this sketch, we discern no badge
of infamy on man or woman. It was the policy of
our ancestors to search out even the most secret sins,
and expose them to shame, without fear or favor, in
the broadest light of the noonday sun. Were such
the custom now, perchance we might find materials
for a no less piquant sketch than the above.
Except the malefactors whom we have described,
and the diseased or infirm persons, the whole male
population of the town, between sixteen years and
sixty, were seen in the ranks of the trainband. A
few stately savages, in all the pomp and dignity of
the primeval Indian, stood gazing at the spectacle.
Their flint-headed arrows were but childish weapons,
compared with the matchlocks of the Puritans, and
would have rattled harmlessly against the steel caps
and hammered iron breastplates, which enclosed each
soldier in an individual fortress. The valiant John
Endicott glanced with an eye of pride at his sturdy
followers, and prepared to renew the martial toils of
the day.
`Come, my stout hearts!' quoth he, drawing his
sword. `Let us show these poor heathen that we
can handle our weapons like men of might. Well
for them, if they put us not to prove it in earnest!'
The iron-breasted company straightened their line,
and each man drew the heavy butt of his matchlock
close to his left foot, thus awaiting the orders of the
captain. But, as Endicott glanced right and left
along the front, he discovered a personage at some
little distance, with whom it behoved him to hold a
parley. It was an elderly gentleman, wearing a black
cloak and band, and a high-crowned hat, beneath which
was a velvet skull-cap, the whole being the garb of a
Puritan minister. This reverend person bore a staff,
which seemed to have been recently cut in the forest,
and his shoes were bemired, as if he had been
travelling
on foot through the swamps of the wilderness.
His aspect was perfectly that of a pilgrim,
heightened
also by an apostolic dignity. Just as Endicott
perceived him, he laid aside his staff, and stooped to
drink at a bubbling fountain, which gushed into the
sunshine about a score of yards from the corner of
the meetinghouse. But, ere the good man drank, he
turned his face heavenward in thankfulness, and then,
holding back his gray beard with one hand, he scooped
up his simple draught in the hollow of the other.
`What, ho! good Mr. Williams,' shouted Endicott.
`You are welcome back again to our town of peace.
How does our worthy Governor Winthrop? And
what news from Boston?'
`The Governor hath his health, worshipful Sir,'
answered Roger Williams, now resuming his staff,
and drawing near. `And, for the news, here is a
letter, which, knowing I was to travel hitherward
today
,
his Excellency committed to my charge.
Belike
it contains tidings of much import; for a ship
arrived yesterday from England.'
Mr. Williams, the minister of Salem, and of course
known to all the spectators, had now reached the spot
where Endicott was standing under the banner of his
company, and put the Governor's epistle into his
hand. The broad seal was impressed with
Winthrop's
coat of arms. Endicott hastily unclosed the
letter, and began to read; while, as his eye passed
down the page, a wrathful change came over his
manly countenance. The blood glowed through it,
till it seemed to be kindling with an internal heat;
nor was it unnatural to suppose that his breastplate
would likewise become red hot, with the angry fire of
the bosom which it covered. Arriving at the
conclusion
,
he shook the letter fiercely in his hand, so that it
rustled as loud as the flag above his head.
VOL. II. 19
`Black tidings these, Mr. Williams,' said he;
`blacker never came to New England. Doubtless
you know their purport?'
`Yea, truly,' replied Roger Williams; `for the
Governor consulted, respecting this matter, with my
brethren in the ministry at Boston; and my opinion
was likewise asked. And his Excellency entreats you
by me, that the news be not suddenly noised abroad,
lest the people be stirred up unto some outbreak, and
thereby give the King and the Archbishop a handle
against us.'
`The Governor is a wise man,  a wise man, and
a meek and moderate,' said Endicott, setting his teeth
grimly. `Nevertheless, I must do according to my
own best judgment. There is neither man, woman,
nor child in New England, but has a concern as dear
as life in these tidings; and, if John Endicott's voice
be loud enough, man, woman, and child shall hear
them. Soldiers, wheel into a hollow square! Ho,
good people! Here are news for one and all of you.'
The soldiers closed in around their captain; and
he and Roger Williams stood together under the
banner of the Red Cross; while the women and the
aged men pressed forward, and the mothers held up
their children to look Endicott in the face. A few
taps of the drum gave signal for silence and attention.
`Fellow-soldiers,  fellow-exiles,' began Endicott,
speaking under strong excitement, yet powerfully
restraining it, `wherefore did ye leave your native
country? Wherefore, I say, have we left the green
and fertile fields, the cottages, or, perchance, the old
gray halls, where we were born and bred, the
churchyards
where our forefathers lie buried? Wherefore
have we come hither to set up our own tombstones in
a wilderness? A howling wilderness it is! The wolf
and the bear meet us within halloo of our dwellings.
The savage lieth in wait for us in the dismal shadow
of the woods. The stubborn roots of the trees break
our ploughshares, when we would till the earth.
Our children cry for bread, and we must dig in the
sands of the sea-shore to satisfy them. Wherefore,
I say again, have we sought this country of a rugged
soil and wintry sky? Was it not for the enjoyment
of our civil rights? Was it not for liberty to
worship
God according to our conscience?'
`Call you this liberty of conscience?' interrupted
a voice on the steps of the meetinghouse.
It was the Wanton Gospeller. A sad and quiet
smile flitted across the mild visage of Roger
Williams
.
But Endicott, in the excitement of the
moment
,
shook his sword wrathfully at the culprit,  an
ominous gesture from a man like him.
`What hast thou to do with conscience, thou
knave?' cried he. `I said, liberty to worship God,
not license to profane and ridicule him. Break not
in upon my speech; or I will lay thee neck and heels
till this time to-morrow! Hearken to me, friends,
nor heed that accursed rhapsodist. As I was saying,
we have sacrificed all things, and have come to a
land whereof the old world hath scarcely heard, that
we might make a new world unto ourselves, and
painfully seek a path from hence to Heaven. But
what think ye now? This son of a Scotch tyrant,
this grandson of a papistical and adulterous Scotch
woman, whose death proved that a golden crown
doth not always save an anointed head from the
block "
`Nay, brother, nay,' interposed Mr. Williams;
`thy words are not meet for a secret chamber, far
less for a public street.'
`Hold thy peace, Roger Williams!' answered
Endicott, imperiously. `My spirit is wiser than thine,
for the business now in hand. I tell ye, fellow-exiles,
that Charles of England, and Laud, our bitterest
persecutor
,
arch-priest of Canterbury, are resolute to
pursue us even hither. They are taking counsel,
saith this letter, to send over a governor-general, in
whose breast shall be deposited all the law and equity
of the land. They are minded, also, to establish the
idolatrous forms of English Episcopacy; so that,
when Laud shall kiss the Pope's toe, as cardinal of
Rome, he may deliver New England, bound hand
and foot, into the power of his master!'
A deep groan from the auditors,  a sound of
wrath, as well as fear and sorrow,  responded to
this intelligence.
`Look ye to it, brethren,' resumed Endicott, with
increasing energy. `If this king and this arch-prelate
have their will, we shall briefly behold a cross on the
spire of this tabernacle which we have builded, and
a high altar within its walls, with wax tapers burning
round it at noonday. We shall hear the sacring-bell,
and the voices of the Romish priests saying the mass.
But think ye, Christian men, that these abominations
may be suffered without a sword drawn? without a
shot fired? without blood spilt, yea, on the very stairs
of the pulpit? No,  be ye strong of hand, and
stout of heart! Here we stand on our own soil,
which we have bought with our goods, which we have
won with our swords, which we have cleared with our
axes, which we have tilled with the sweat of our
brows, which we have sanctified with our prayers to
the God that brought us hither! Who shall enslave
us here? What have we to do with this mitred
prelate
,
with this crowned king? What have we to
do with England?'
Endicott gazed round at the excited countenances
of the people, now full of his own spirit, and then
turned suddenly to the standard-bearer, who stood
close behind him.
`Officer, lower your banner!' said he.
The officer obeyed; and, brandishing his sword,
Endicott thrust it through the cloth, and, with his left
hand, rent the Red Cross completely out of the
banner
.
He then waved the tattered ensign above his
head.
`Sacrilegious wretch!' cried the high-churchman
in the pillory, unable longer to restrain himself;
`thou hast rejected the symbol of our holy religion!'
`Treason, treason!' roared the royalist in the
stocks. `He hath defaced the King's banner!'
`Before God and man, I will avouch the deed,'
answered Endicott. `Beat a flourish, drummer!
shout, soldiers and people!  in honor of the ensign
of New England. Neither Pope nor Tyrant hath
part in it now!'
With a cry of triumph, the people gave their
sanction
to one of the boldest exploits which our history
records. And, for ever honored be the name of
Endicott
!
We look back through the mist of ages, and
recognise, in the rending of the Red Cross from New
England's banner, the first omen of that deliverance
which our fathers consummated, after the bones of
the stern Puritan had lain more than a century in the
dust.
THE LILY'S QUEST.
AN APOLOGUE.
Two
lovers, once upon a time, had planned a little
summer house, in the form of an antique temple,
which it was their purpose to consecrate to all
manner
of refined and innocent enjoyments. There they
would hold pleasant intercourse with one another,
and the circle of their familiar friends; there they
would give festivals of delicious fruit; there they
would hear lightsome music, intermingled with the
strains of pathos which make joy more sweet; there
they would read poetry and fiction, and permit their
own minds to flit away in day-dreams and romance;
there, in short  for why should we shape out the
vague sunshine of their hopes?  there all pure
delights
were to cluster like roses among the pillars of
the edifice, and blossom ever new and
spontaneously
.
So, one breezy and cloudless afternoon, Adam
Forrester and Lilias Fay set out upon a ramble over
the wide estate which they were to possess together,
seeking a proper site for their Temple of Happiness.
They were themselves a fair and happy spectacle, fit
priest and priestess for such a shrine; although,
making poetry of the pretty name of Lilias, Adam
Forrester was wont to call her
Lily,
because her
form was as fragile, and her cheek almost as pale.
As they passed, hand in hand, down the avenue of
drooping elms, that led from the portal of Lilias
Fay's paternal mansion, they seemed to glance like
winged creatures through the strips of sunshine, and
to scatter brightness where the deep shadows fell.
But, setting forth at the same time with this youthful
pair, there was a dismal figure, wrapt in a black velvet
cloak that might have been made of a coffin-pall, and
with a sombre hat, such as mourners wear, drooping its
broad brim over his heavy brows. Glancing behind
them, the lovers well knew who it was that followed,
but wished from their hearts that he had been
elsewhere
,
as being a companion so strangely unsuited
to their joyous errand. It was a near relative of
Lilias Fay, an old man by the name of Walter
Gascoigne
,
who had long labored under the burthen of a
melancholy spirit, which was sometimes maddened
into absolute insanity, and always had a tinge of it.
What a contrast between the young pilgrims of bliss,
and their unbidden associate! They looked as if
moulded of Heaven's sunshine, and he of earth's
gloomiest shade; they flitted along like Hope and
Joy, roaming hand in hand through life; while his
darksome figure stalked behind, a type of all the
woful influences which life could fling upon them.
But the three had not gone far, when they reached a
spot that pleased the gentle Lily, and she paused.
`What sweeter place shall we find than this?'
said she. `Why should we seek further for the site
of our Temple?'
It was indeed a delightful spot of earth, though
undistinguished
by any very prominent beauties, being
merely a nook in the shelter of a hill, with the
prospect
of a distant lake in one direction, and of a
church spire in another. There were vistas and
pathways, leading onward and onward into the green
wood-lands, and vanishing away in the glimmering
shade. The Temple, if erected here, would look
towards the west; so that the lovers could shape all
sorts of magnificent dreams out of the purple, violet,
and gold of the sun-set sky; and few of their
anticipated
pleasures were dearer than this sport of fantasy.
`Yes,' said Adam Forrester, `we might seek all
day, and find no lovelier spot. We will build our
Temple here.'
But their sad old companion, who had taken his
stand on the very site which they proposed to cover
with a marble floor, shook his head and frowned;
and the young man and the Lily deemed it almost
enough to blight the spot, and desecrate it for their
airy Temple, that his dismal figure had thrown its
shadow there. He pointed to some scattered stones,
the remnants of a former structure, and to flowers
such as young girls delight to nurse in their gardens,
but which had now relapsed into the wild simplicity
of nature.
`Not here!' cried old Walter Gascoigne. `Here,
long ago, other mortals built their Temple of
Happiness
.
Seek another site for yours!'
`What!' exclaimed Lilias Fay. `Have any ever
planned such a Temple, save ourselves?'
`Poor child!' said her gloomy kinsman. `In one
shape or other, every mortal has dreamed your
dream.'
Then he told the lovers, how  not, indeed, an
antique Temple  but a dwelling had once stood
there, and that a dark-clad guest had dwelt among
its inmates, sitting for ever at the fireside, and
poisoning
all their household mirth. Under this type,
Adam Forrester and Lilias saw that the old man
spake of Sorrow. He told of nothing that might not
be recorded in the history of almost every
household
;
and yet his hearers felt as if no sunshine
ought to fall upon a spot, where human grief had left
so deep a stain; or, at least, that no joyous Temple
should be built there.
`This is very sad,' said the Lily, sighing.
`Well, there are lovelier spots than this,' said
Adam Forrester, soothingly  `spots which sorrow
has not blighted.'
So they hastened away, and the melancholy
Gascoigne
followed them, looking as if he had gathered
up all the gloom of the deserted spot, and was
bearing
it as a burthen of inestimable treasure. But still
they rambled on, and soon found themselves in a
rocky dell, through the midst of which ran a
streamlet
,
with ripple, and foam, and a continual voice of
inarticulate joy. It was a wild retreat, walled on
either side with gray precipices, which would have
frowned somewhat too sternly, had not a profusion
of green shrubbery rooted itself into their crevices,
and wreathed gladsome foliage around their solemn
brows. But the chief joy of the dell was in the
little stream, which seemed like the presence of a
blissful child, with nothing earthly to do, save to
babble
merrily and disport itself, and make every living
soul its playfellow, and throw the sunny gleams of
its spirit upon all.
`Here, here is the spot!' cried the two lovers
with one voice, as they reached a level space on the
brink of a small cascade. `This glen was made on
purpose for our Temple!'
`And the glad song of the brook will be always in
our ears,' said Lilias Fay.'
`And its long melody shall sing the bliss of our
life-time,' said Adam Forrester.
`Ye must build no Temple here!' murmured their
dismal companion.
And there again was the old lunatic, standing just
on the spot where they meant to rear their lightsome
dome, and looking like the embodied symbol of some
great woe, that, in forgotten days, had happened there.
And, alas! there had been woe, nor that alone. A
young man, more than a hundred years before, had
lured hither a girl that loved him, and on this spot
had murdered her, and washed his bloody hands in
the stream which sang so merrily. And ever since,
the victim's death-shrieks were often heard to echo
between the cliffs.
`And see!' cried old Gascoigne, `is the stream
yet pure from the stain of the murderer's hands?'
`Methinks it has a tinge of blood,' faintly answered
the Lily; and being as slight as the gossamer, she
trembled and clung to her lover's arm, whispering,
`let us flee from this dreadful vale!'
`Come, then,' said Adam Forrester, as cheerily as
he could; `we shall soon find a happier spot.'
They set forth again, young Pilgrims on that quest
which millions  which every child of Earth  has
tried in turn. And were the Lily and her lover to
be more fortunate than all those millions? For a
long time, it seemed not so. The dismal shape of
the old lunatic still glided behind them; and for every
spot that looked lovely in their eyes, he had some
legend of human wrong or suffering, so miserably
sad, that his auditors could never afterwards connect
the idea of joy with the place where it had happened.
Here, a heart-broken woman, kneeling to her child,
had been spurned from his feet; here, a desolate old
creature had prayed to the evil one, and had received
a fiendish malignity of soul, in answer to her prayer;
here, a new-born infant, sweet blossom of life, had
been found dead, with the impress of its mother's
fingers round its throat; and here, under a shattered
oak, two lovers had been stricken by lightning, and
fell blackened corpses in each other's arms. The
dreary Gascoigne had a gift to know whatever evil
and lamentable thing had stained the bosom of mother
Earth; and when his funereal voice had told the tale,
it appeared like a prophecy of future woe, as well as
a tradition of the past. And now, by their sad
demeanor
,
you would have fancied that the pilgrim
lovers were seeking, not a temple of earthly joy, but
a tomb for themselves and their posterity."
`Where in this world,' exclaimed Adam Forrester,
despondingly, `shall we build our Temple of
Happiness
?'
`Where in this world, indeed!' repeated Lilias
Fay; and being faint and weary, the more so by the
heaviness of her heart, the Lily drooped her head
and sat down on the summit of a knoll, repeating,
`where in this world shall we build our Temple?'
`Ah! have you already asked yourselves that
question?' said their companion, his shaded features
growing even gloomier with the smile that dwelt on
them; `yet there is a place, even in this world,
where ye may build it.'
While the old man spoke, Adam Forrester and
Lilias had carelessly thrown their eyes around, and
perceived that the spot, where they had chanced to
pause, possessed a quiet charm, which was well
enough adapted to their present mood of mind. It
was a small rise of ground, with a certain regularity
of shape, that had perhaps been bestowed by art;
and a group of trees, which almost surrounded it,
threw their pensive shadows across and far beyond,
although some softened glory of the sunshine found
its way there. The ancestral mansion, wherein the
lovers would dwell together, appeared on one side,
and the ivied church, where they were to worship,
on another. Happening to cast their eyes on the
ground, they smiled, yet with a sense of wonder, to
see that a pale lily was growing at their feet.
`We will build our Temple here,' said they,
simultaneously
,
and with an indescribable conviction that
they had at last found the very spot.
Yet, while they uttered this exclamation, the young
man and the Lily turned an apprehensive glance at
their dreary associate, deeming it hardly possible
that some tale of earthly affliction should not make
those precincts loathsome, as in every former case.
The old man stood just behind them, so as to form
the chief figure in the group, with his sable cloak
muffling the lower part of his visage, and his sombre
hat overshadowing his brows. But he gave no word
of dissent from their purpose; and an inscrutable
smile was accepted by the lovers as a token that here
had been no foot-print of guilt or sorrow, to desecrate
the site of their Temple of Happiness.
In a little time longer, while summer was still in
its prime, the fairy structure of the Temple arose on
the summit of the knoll, amid the solemn shadows of
the trees, yet often gladdened with bright sunshine.
It was built of white marble, with slender and
graceful
pillars, supporting a vaulted dome; and beneath
the centre of this dome, upon a pedestal, was a slab
of dark-veined marble, on which books and music
might be strewn. But there was a fantasy among the
people of the neighborhood, that the edifice was
planned after an ancient mausoleum, and was
intended
for a tomb, and that the central slab of dark-veined
marble was to be inscribed with the names of buried
VOL II. 20
ones. They doubted, too, whether the form of Lilias
Fay could appertain to a creature of this earth, being
so very delicate, and growing every day more fragile,
so that she looked as if the summer breeze should
snatch her up, and waft her heavenward. But still
she watched the daily growth of the Temple; and so
did old Walter Gascoigne, who now made that spot
his continual haunt, leaning whole hours together on
his staff, and giving as deep attention to the work as
though it had been indeed a tomb. In due time it
was finished, and a day appointed for a simple rite of
dedication.
On the preceding evening, after Adam Forrester
had taken leave of his mistress, he looked back
towards
the portal of her dwelling, and felt a strange
thrill of fear; for he imagined that, as the setting
sunbeams
faded from her figure, she was exhaling away,
and that something of her ethereal substance was
withdrawn, with each lessening gleam of light. With
his farewell glance, a shadow had fallen over the
portal
,
and Lilias was invisible. His foreboding spirit
deemed it an omen at the time; and so it proved;
for the sweet earthly form, by which the Lily had
been manifested to the world, was found lifeless, the
next morning, in the Temple, with her head resting
on her arms, which were folded upon the slab of
dark-veined marble. The chill winds of the earth
had long since breathed a blight into this beautiful
flower, so that a loving hand had now transplanted it,
to blossom brightly in the garden of Paradise.
But alas, for the Temple of Happiness! In his
unutterable grief, Adam Forrester had no purpose
more at heart, than to convert this Temple of many
delightful hopes into a tomb, and bury his dead
mistress
there. And lo! a wonder! Digging a grave
beneath the Temple's marble floor, the sexton found
no virgin earth, such as was meet to receive the
maiden's dust, but an ancient sepulchre, in which
were treasured up the bones of generations that had
died long ago. Among those forgotten ancestors was
the Lily to be laid. And when the funeral
procession
brought Lilias thither in her coffin, they beheld
old Walter Gascoigne standing beneath the dome of
the Temple, with his cloak of pall, and face of
darkest
gloom; and wherever that figure might take its
stand, the spot would seem a sepulchre. He watched
the mourners as they lowered the coffin down.
`And so,' said he to Adam Forrester, with the
strange smile in which his insanity was wont to gleam
forth, `you have found no better foundation for your
happiness than on a grave!'
But, as the Shadow of Affliction spoke, a vision of
Hope and Joy had its birth in Adam's mind, even
from the old man's taunting words; for then he knew
what was betokened by the parable in which the Lily
and himself had acted; and the mystery of Life and
Death was opened to him.
`Joy! joy!' he cried, throwing his arms towards
Heaven, `on a grave be the site of our Temple; and
now our happiness is for Eternity!'
With those words, a ray of sunshine broke through
the dismal sky, and glimmered down into the
sepulchre
;
while, at the same moment, the shape of old
Walter Gascoigne stalked drearily away, because his
gloom, symbolic of all earthly sorrow, might no
longer abide there, now that the darkest riddle of
humanity was read.
FOOT-PRINTS ON THE SEA-SHORE.
It
must be a spirit much unlike my own, which can
keep itself in health and vigor without sometimes
stealing from the sultry sunshine of the world, to
plunge into the cool bath of solitude. At intervals,
and not infrequent ones, the forest and the ocean
summon me  one with the roar of its waves, the
other with the murmur of its boughs  forth from
the haunts of men. But I must wander many a mile,
ere I could stand beneath the shadow of even one
primeval tree, much less be lost among the multitude
of hoary trunks, and hidden from earth and sky by
the mystery of darksome foliage. Nothing is within
my daily reach more like a forest than the acre or
two of woodland near some suburban farm-house.
When, therefore, the yearning for seclusion becomes
a necessity within me, I am drawn to the sea-shore,
which extends its line of rude rocks and seldom-
trodden
sands, for leagues around our bay. Setting
forth, at my last ramble, on a September morning, I
bound myself with a hermit's vow, to interchange no
thoughts with man or woman, to share no social
pleasure, but to derive all that day's enjoyment from
shore, and sea, and sky,  from my soul's
communion
with these, and from fantasies, and
recollections
,
or anticipated realities. Surely here is enough
to feed a human spirit for a single day. Farewell,
then, busy world! Till your evening lights shall
shine along the street  till they gleam upon my
sea-flushed
face, as I tread homeward,  free me from
your ties, and let me be a peaceful outlaw.
Highways and cross-paths are hastily traversed;
and, clambering down a crag, I find myself at the
extremity of a long beach. How gladly does the
spirit leap forth, and suddenly enlarge its sense of
being to the full extent of the broad, blue, sunny
deep! A greeting and a homage to the Sea! I
descend over its margin, and dip my hand into the
wave that meets me, and bathe my brow. That
far-resounding
roar is Ocean's voice of welcome. His
salt breath brings a blessing along with it. Now let
us pace together  the reader's fancy arm in arm
with mine  this noble beach, which extends a mile
or more from that craggy promontory to yonder
rampart of broken rocks. In front, the sea; in the
rear, a precipitous bank, the grassy verge of which
is breaking away, year after year, and flings down
its tufts of verdure upon the barrenness below. The
beach itself is a broad space of sand, brown and
sparkling, with hardly any pebbles intermixed. Near
the water's edge there is a wet margin, which glistens
brightly in the sunshine, and reflects objects like a
mirror; and as we tread along the glistening border,
a dry spot flashes around each footstep, but grows
moist again, as we lift our feet. In some spots, the
sand receives a complete impression of the sole
square toe and all; elsewhere, it is of such marble
firmness, that we must stamp heavily to leave a print
even of the iron-shod heel. Along the whole of this
extensive beach gambols the surf-wave; now it makes
a feint of dashing onward in a fury, yet dies away
with a meek murmur, and does but kiss the strand;
now, after many such abortive efforts, it rears itself
up in an unbroken line, heightening as it advances,
without a speck of foam on its green crest. With
how fierce a roar it flings itself forward, and rushes
far up the beach!
As I threw my eyes along the edge of the surf, I
remember that I was startled, as Robinson Crusoe
might have been, by the sense that human life was
within the magic circle of my solitude. Afar off in
the remote distance of the beach, appearing like
sea-nymphs
,
or some airier things, such as might tread
upon the feathery spray, was a group of girls.
Hardly had I beheld them, when they passed into
the shadow of the rocks and vanished. To comfort
myself  for truly I would fain have gazed a while
longer  I made acquaintance with a flock of
beach-birds
.
These little citizens of the sea and air
preceded
me by about a stone's-throw along the strand,
seeking, I suppose, for food upon its margin. Yet,
with a philosophy which mankind would do well to
imitate, they drew a continual pleasure from their
toil for a subsistence. The sea was each little bird's
great playmate. They chased it downward as it
swept back, and again ran up swiftly before the
impending
wave, which sometimes overtook them and
bore them off their feet. But they floated as lightly
as one of their own feathers on the breaking crest.
In their airy flutterings, they seemed to rest on the
evanescent spray. Their images,  long-legged
little
figures, with grey backs and snowy bosoms,
were seen as distinctly as the realities in the mirror
of the glistening strand. As I advanced, they flew a
score or two of yards, and, again alighting,
recommenced
their dalliance with the surf-wave; and thus
they bore me company along the beach, the types of
pleasant fantasies, till, at its extremity, they took
wing over the ocean, and were gone. After forming
a friendship with these small surf-spirits, it is really
worth a sigh, to find no memorial of them save their
multitudinous little tracks in the sand.
When we have paced the length of the beach, it
is pleasant, and not unprofitable, to retrace our steps,
and recall the whole mood and occupation of the
mind during the former passage. Our tracks, being
all discernible, will guide us with an observing
consciousness
through every unconscious wandering of
thought and fancy. Here we followed the surf in its
reflux, to pick up a shell which the sea seemed loth
to relinquish. Here we found a sea-weed, with an
immense brown leaf, and trailed it behind us by its
long snake-like stalk. Here we seized a live
horseshoe
by the tail, and counted the many claws of that
queer monster. Here we dug into the sand for
pebbles
,
and skipped them upon the surface of the
water
.
Here we wet our feet while examining a
jellyfish
,
which the waves, having just tossed it up, now
sought to snatch away again. Here we trod along
the brink of a fresh-water brooklet, which flows
across the beach, becoming shallower and more
shallow
,
till at last it sinks into the sand, and perishes in
the effort to bear its little tribute to the main. Here
some vagary appears to have bewildered us; for our
tracks go round and round, and are confusedly
intermingled
,
as if we had found a labyrinth upon the
level beach. And here, amid our idle pastime, we
sat down upon almost the only stone that breaks the
surface of the sand, and were lost in an unlooked-for
and overpowering conception of the majesty and
awfulness of the great deep. Thus, by tracking our
foot-prints in the sand, we track our own nature in
its wayward course, and steal a glance upon it, when
it never dreams of being so observed. Such glances
always make us wiser.
This extensive beach affords room for another
pleasant pastime. With your staff, you may write
verses  love-verses, if they please you best  and
consecrate them with a woman's name. Here, too,
may be inscribed thoughts, feelings, desires, warm
outgushings from the heart's secret places, which you
would not pour upon the sand without the certainty
that, almost ere the sky has looked upon them, the
sea will wash them out. Stir not hence, till the
record be effaced. Now  for there is room enough
on your canvas  draw huge faces  huge as that of
the Sphynx on Egyptian sands  and fit them with
bodies of corresponding immensity, and legs which
might stride half-way to yonder island. Child's play
becomes magnificent on so grand a scale. But, after
all, the most fascinating employment is simply to
write your name in the sand. Draw the letters
gigantic, so that two strides may barely measure
them, and three for the long strokes! Cut deep,
that the record may be permanent! Statesmen and
warriors, and poets, have spent their strength in no
better cause than this. Is it accomplished? Return,
then, in an hour or two, and seek for this mighty
record of a name. The sea will have swept over it,
even as time rolls its effacing waves over the names
of statesmen, and warriors, and poets. Hark, the
surf-wave laughs at you!
Passing from the beach, I begin to clamber over
the crags, making my difficult way among the ruins
of a rampart, shattered and broken by the assaults of
a fierce enemy. The rocks rise in every variety of
attitude; some of them have their feet in the foam,
and are shagged half-way upward with sea-weed;
some have been hollowed almost into caverns by the
unwearied toil of the sea, which can afford to spend
centuries in wearing away a rock, or even polishing
a pebble. One huge rock ascends in monumental
shape, with a face like a giant's tombstone, on which
the veins resemble inscriptions, but in an unknown
tongue. We will fancy them the forgotten
characters
of an antediluvian race; or else that nature's
own hand has here recorded a mystery, which, could
I read her language, would make mankind the wiser
and the happier. How many a thing has troubled
me with that same idea! Pass on, and leave it
unexplained
.
Here is a narrow avenue, which might
seem to have been hewn through the very heart of
an enormous crag, affording passage for the rising
sea to thunder back and forth, filling it with
tumultuous
foam, and then leaving its floor of black pebbles
bare and glistening. In this chasm there was once
an intersecting vein of softer stone, which the waves
have gnawed away piecemeal, while the granite walls
remain entire on either side. How sharply, and with
what harsh clamor, does the sea rake back the
pebbles
,
as it momentarily withdraws into its own depths!
At intervals, the floor of the chasm is left nearly dry;
but anon, at the outlet, two or three great waves are
seen struggling to get in at once; two hit the walls
athwart, while one rushes straight through, and all
three thunder, as if with rage and triumph. They
heap the chasm with a snow-drift of foam and spray.
While watching this scene, I can never rid myself of
the idea, that a monster, endowed with life and fierce
energy, is striving to burst his way through the
narrow
pass. And what a contrast, to look through the
stormy chasm, and catch a glimpse of the calm bright
sea beyond!
Many interesting discoveries may be made among
these broken cliffs. Once, for example, I found a
dead seal, which a recent tempest had tossed into the
nook of the rocks, where his shaggy carcass lay
rolled in a heap of eel-grass, as if the sea-monster
sought to hide himself from my eye. Another time,
a shark seemed on the point of leaping from the surf
to swallow me; nor did I, wholly without dread,
approach near enough to ascertain that the man-eater
had already met his own death from some fisherman
in the bay. In the same ramble, I encountered a
bird  a large grey bird  but whether a loon, or a
wild goose, or the identical albatross of the Ancient
Mariner, was beyond my ornithology to decide. It
reposed so naturally on a bed of dry sea-weed, with
its head beside its wing, that I almost fancied it alive,
and trod softly lest it should suddenly spread its
wings skyward. But the sea-bird would soar among
the clouds no more, nor ride upon its native waves;
so I drew near, and pulled out one of its mottled
tail-feathers
for a remembrance. Another day, I
discovered
an immense bone, wedged into a chasm of
the rocks; it was at least ten feet long, curved like a
scimetar, bejeweled with barnacles and small
shellfish
,
and partly covered with a growth of sea-weed.
Some leviathan of former ages had used this
ponderous
mass as a jaw-bone. Curiosities of a minuter
order may be observed in a deep reservoir, which is
replenished with water at every tide, but becomes a
lake among the crags, save when the sea is at its
height. At the bottom of this rocky basin grow
marine
plants, some of which tower high beneath the
water, and cast a shadow in the sunshine. Small
fishes dart to and fro, and hide themselves among the
sea-weed; there is also a solitary crab, who appears
to lead the life of a hermit, communing with none of
the other denizens of the place; and likewise several
five-fingers  for I know no other name than that
which children give them. If your imagination he at
all accustomed to such freaks, you may look down
into the depths of this pool, and fancy it the
mysterious
depth of ocean. But where are the hulks and
scattered timbers of sunken ships?  where the
treasures that old ocean hoards?  where the
corroded
cannon?  where the corpses and skeletons of
seamen, who went down in storm and battle?
On the day of my last ramble, (it was a
September
day, yet as warm as summer,) what should I
behold
as I approached the above described basin but
three girls sitting on its margin, and  yes, it is
veritably
so  laving their snowy feet in the sunny
water
!
These, these are the warm realities of those
three visionary shapes that flitted from me on the
beach. Hark! their merry voices, as they toss up
the water with their feet! They have not seen me.
I must shrink behind this rock, and steal away again.
In honest truth, vowed to solitude as I am, there is
something in this encounter that makes the heart
flutter with a strangely pleasant sensation. I know
these girls to be realities of flesh and blood, yet,
glancing at them so briefly, they mingle like kindred
creatures with the ideal beings of my mind. It is
pleasant, likewise, to gaze down from some high
crag, and watch a group of children, gathering
pebbles
and pearly shells, and playing with the surf, as
with old Ocean's hoary heard. Nor does it infringe
upon my seclusion, to see yonder boat at anchor off
the shore, swinging dreamily to and fro, and rising
and sinking with the alternate swell; while the crew
four gentlemen, in round-about jackets  are busy
with their fishing-lines. But, with an inward
antipathy
and a headlong flight, do I eschew the presence
of any meditative stroller like myself, known by his
pilgrim staff, his sauntering step, his shy demeanor,
his observant yet abstracted eye. From such a man,
as if another self had scared me, I scramble hastily
over the rocks, and take refuge in a nook which many
a secret hour has given me a right to call my own.
I would do battle for it even with the churl that
should produce the title-deeds. Have not my
musings
melted into its rocky walls and sandy floor, and
made them a portion of myself?
It is a recess in the line of cliffs, walled round by a
rough, high precipice, which almost encircles and
shuts in a little space of sand. In front, the sea
appears
as between the pillars of a portal. In the
rear, the precipice is broken and intermixed with
earth, which gives nourishment not only to clinging
and twining shrubs, but to trees, that gripe the rock
with their naked roots, and seem to struggle hard for
footing and for soil enough to live upon. These are
fir trees; but oaks hang their heavy branches from
above, and throw down acorns on the beach, and
shed their withering foliage upon the waves. At this
autumnal season, the precipice is decked with
variegated
VOL. II. 21
splendor; trailing wreaths of scarlet flaunt
from the summit downward; tufts of yellow-
flowering
shrubs, and rose bushes, with their reddened
leaves and glossy seed-berries, sprout from each
crevice; at every glance, I detect some new light or
shade of beauty, all contrasting with the stern, grey
rock. A rill of water trickles down the cliff and fills
a little cistern near the base. I drain it at a draught,
and find it fresh and pure. This recess shall be my
dining-hall. And what the feast? A few biscuits,
made savory by soaking them in sea-water, a tuft of
samphire gathered from the beach, and an apple for
the desert. By this time, the little rill has filled its
reservoir again; and, as I quaff it, I thank God more
heartily than for a civic banquet, that He gives me
the healthful appetite to make a feast of bread and
water.
Dinner being over, I throw myself at length upon
the sand, and, basking in the sunshine, let my mind
disport itself at will. The walls of this my
hermitage
have no tongue to tell my follies, though I
sometimes
fancy that they have ears to hear them, and a
soul to sympathize. There is a magic in this spot.
Dreams haunt its precincts, and flit around me in
broad sun-light, nor require that sleep shall blindfold
me to real objects, ere these be visible. Here can I
frame a story of two lovers, and make their shadows
live before me, and be mirrored in the tranquil water,
as they tread along the sand, leaving no foot-prints.
Here, should I will it, I can summon up a single
shade, and be myself her lover. Yes, dreamer,
but your lonely heart will be the colder for such
fancies. Sometimes, too, the Past comes back, and
finds me here, and in her train come faces which
were gladsome, when I knew them, yet seem not
gladsome now. Would that my hiding Place were
lonelier, so that the past might not find me! Get ye
all gone, old friends, and let me listen to the murmur
of the sea,  a melancholy voice, but less sad than
yours. Of what mysteries is it telling? Of sunken
ships, and whereabouts they lie? Of islands afar
and undiscovered, whose tawny children are
unconscious
of other islands and of continents, and deem
the stars of heaven their nearest neighbors? Nothing
of all this. What then? Has it talked for so many
ages, and meant nothing all the while? No; for
those ages find utterance in the sea's unchanging
voice, and warn the listener to withdraw his interest
from mortal vicissitudes, and let the infinite idea of
eternity pervade his soul. This is wisdom; and,
therefore, will I spend the next half-hour in shaping
little boats of drift-wood, and launching them on
voyages across the cove, with the feather of a
seagull
for a sail. If the voice of ages tell me true, this
is as wise an occupation as to build ships of five
hundred
tons, and launch them forth upon the main,
bound to `far Cathay.' Yet, how would the
merchant
sneer at me!
And, after all, can such philosophy be true?
Methinks
I could find a thousand arguments against it.
Well, then, let yonder shaggy rock, mid-deep in the
surf  see! he is somewhat wrathful,  he rages and
roars and foams  let that tall rock be my antagonist,
and let me exercise my oratory like him of Athens,
who bandied words with an angry sea and got the
victory. My maiden speech is a triumphant one;
for the gentleman in sea-weed has nothing to offer in
reply, save an immitigable roaring. His voice,
indeed
,
will be heard a long while after mine is hushed.
Once more I shout, and the cliffs reverberate the
sound. Oh, what joy for a shy man to feel himself
so solitary, that he may lift his voice to its highest
pitch without hazard of a listener! But, hush!
be silent, my good friend!  whence comes that
stifled laughter? It was musical,  but how should
there be such music in my solitude? Looking
upwards
,
I catch a glimpse of three faces, peeping from
the summit of the cliff, like angels between me and
their native sky. Ah, fair girls, you may make
yourselves
merry at my eloquence,  but it was my turn
to smile when I saw your white feet in the pool! Let
us keep each other's secrets.
The sunshine has now passed from my hermitage,
except a gleam upon the sand just where it meets the
sea. A crowd of gloomy fantasies will come and
haunt me, if I tarry longer here, in the darkening
twilight of these grey rocks. This is a dismal place
in some moods of the mind. Climb we, therefore,
the precipice, and pause a moment on the brink,
gazing
down into that hollow chamber by the deep,
where we have been, what few can be, sufficient to
our own pastime  yes, say the word outright!
self-sufficient to our own happiness. How lonesome
looks the recess now, and dreary too,  like all other
spots where happiness has been! There lies my
shadow in the departing sunshine with its head upon
the sea. I will pelt it with pebbles. A hit! a hit!
I clap my hands in triumph, and see! my shadow
clapping its unreal hands, and claiming the triumph
for itself. What a simpleton must I have been all
day, since my own shadow makes a mock of my
fooleries!
Homeward! homeward! It is time to hasten home.
It is time; it is time; for as the sun sinks over the
western
wave, the sea grows melancholy, and the surf has a
saddened tone. The distant sails appear astray, and
not of earth, in their remoteness amid the desolate
waste. My spirit wanders forth afar, but finds no
resting place, and comes shivering back. It is time
that I were hence. But grudge me not the day that
has been spent in seclusion, which yet was not
solitude
,
since the great sea has been my companion,
and the little sea-birds my friends, and the wind has
told me his secrets, and airy shapes have flitted
around me in my hermitage. Such companionship
works an effect upon a man's character, as if he had
been admitted to the society of creatures that are not
mortal. And when, at noontide, I tread the crowded
streets, the influence of this day will still be felt; so
that I shall walk among men kindly and as a brother,
with affection and sympathy, but yet shall not melt
into the indistinguishable mass of human kind. I
shall think my own thoughts, and feel my own
emotions
,
and possess my individuality unviolated.
But it is good, at the eve of such a day, to feel and
know that there are men and women in the world.
That feeling and that knowledge are mine, at this
moment; for, on the shore, far below me, the
fishing-party
have landed from their skiff, and are cooking
their scaly prey by a fire of drift-wood, kindled in
the angle of two rude rocks. The three visionary
girls are likewise there. In the deepening twilight,
while the surf is dashing near their hearth, the ruddy
gleam of the fire throws a strange air of comfort
over the wild cove, bestrewn as it is with pebbles and
sea-weed, and exposed to the `melancholy main.'
Moreover, as the smoke climbs up the precipice, it
brings with it a savory smell from a pan of fried fish,
and a black kettle of chowder, and reminds me that
my dinner was nothing but bread and water, and a
tuft of samphire, and an apple. Methinks the party
might find room for another guest, at that flat rock
which serves them for a table; and if spoons be
scarce, I could pick up a clam-shell on the beach.
They see me now; and  the blessing of a hungry
man upon him!  one of them sends up a hospitable
shout  halloo, Sir Solitary! come down and sup
with us! The ladies wave their handkerchiefs. Can
I decline? No; and be it owned, after all my
solitary
joys, that this is the sweetest moment of a Day
by the Sea-Shore.
EDWARD FANE'S ROSEBUD.
There
is hardly a more difficult exercise of fancy,
than, while gazing at a figure of melancholy age, to
re-create its youth, and, without entirely obliterating
the identity of form and features, to restore those
graces which time has snatched away. Some old
people, especially women, so age-worn and woful are
they, seem never to have been young and gay. It is
easier to conceive that such gloomy phantoms were
sent into the world as withered and decrepit as we
behold them now, with sympathies only for pain and
grief, to watch at death-beds, and weep at funerals.
Even the sable garments of their widowhood appear
essential to their existence; all their attributes
combine
to render them darksome shadows, creeping
strangely amid the sunshine of human life. Yet it is
no unprofitable task, to take one of these doleful
creatures
,
and set fancy resolutely at work to brighten the
dim eye, and darken the silvery locks, and paint the
ashen-cheek with rose-color, and repair the shrunken
and crazy form, till a dewy maiden shall be seen in
the old matron's elbow-chair. The miracle being
wrought, then let the years roll back again, each
sadder
than the last, and the whole weight of age and
sorrow settle down upon the youthful figure. Wrinkles
and furrows, the hand-writing of Time, may thus be
deciphered, and found to contain deep lessons of
thought and feeling. Such profit might be derived,
by a skilful observer, from my much-respected friend,
the Widow Toothaker, a nurse of great repute, who
has breathed the atmosphere of sick-chambers and
dying-breaths, these forty years.
See! she sits cowering over her lonesome hearth,
with her gown and upper petticoat drawn upward,
gathering thriftily into her person the whole warmth
of the fire, which, now at nightfall, begins to
dissipate
the autumnal chill of her chamber. The blaze
quivers capriciously in front, alternately glimmering
into the deepest chasms of her wrinkled visage, and
then permitting a ghostly dimness to mar the outlines
of her venerable figure. And Nurse Toothaker holds
a tea-spoon in her right hand, with which to stir up
the contents of a tumbler in her left, whence steams
a vapory fragrance, abhorred of temperance societies.
Now she sips  now stirs  now sips again. Her sad
old heart has need to be revived by the rich infusion
of Geneva, which is mixed half-and-half with hot
water
,
in the tumbler. All day long she has been sitting
by a death-pillow, and quitted it for her home, only
when the spirit of her patient left the clay, and went
homeward too. But now are her melancholy
meditations
cheered, and her torpid blood warmed, and her
shoulders lightened of at least twenty ponderous years,
by a draught from the true Fountain of Youth, in a
case-bottle. It is strange that men should deem that
fount a fable, when its liquor fills more bottles than
the congress-water! Sip it again, good nurse, and see
whether a second draught will not take off another
score of years, and perhaps ten more, and show us,
in your high-backed chair, the blooming damsel who
plighted troths with Edward Fane. Get you gone,
Age and Widowhood! Come back, unwedded Youth!
But, alas! the charm will not work. In spite of fancy's
most potent spell, I can see only an old dame
cowering
over the fire, a picture of decay and desolation,
while the November blast roars at her in the chimney,
and fitful showers rush suddenly against the window.
Yet there was a time when Rose Grafton  such
was the pretty maiden-name of Nurse Toothaker
possessed beauty that would have gladdened this dim
and dismal chamber, as with sunshine. It won for her
the heart of Edward Fane, who has since made so
great a figure in the world, and is now a grand old
gentleman, with powdered hair, and as gouty as a lord.
These early lovers thought to have walked hand in
hand through life. They had wept together for
Edward's
little sister Mary, whom Rose tended in her
sickness, partly because she was the sweetest child
that ever lived or died, but more for love of him. She
was but three years old. Being such an infant, Death
could not embody his terrors in her little corpse; nor
did Rose fear to touch the dead child's brow, though
chill, as she curled the silken hair around it, nor to take
her tiny hand, and clasp a flower within its fingers.
Afterward, when she looked through the pane of glass
in the coffin-lid, and beheld Mary's face, it seemed not
so much like death, or life, as like a wax-work, wrought
into the perfect image of a child asleep, and dreaming
of its mother's smile. Rose thought her too fair a
thing to be hidden in the grave, and wondered that
an angel did not snatch up little Mary's coffin, and
bear the slumbering babe to heaven, and bid her wake
immortal. But when the sods were laid on little Mary,
the heart of Rose was troubled. She shuddered at
the fantasy, that, in grasping the child's cold fingers,
her virgin hand had exchanged a first greeting with
mortality, and could never lose the earthy taint. How
many a greeting since! But as yet, she was a fair
young girl, with the dew-drops of fresh feeling in
her bosom; and instead of Rose, which seemed too
mature a name for her half-opened beauty, her lover
called her Rosebud.
The rosebud was destined never to bloom for
Edward
Fane. His mother was a rich and haughty dame,
with all the aristocratic prejudices of colonial times.
She scorned Rose Grafton's humble parentage, and
caused her son to break his faith, though, had she let
him choose, he would have prized his Rosebud above
the richest diamond. The lovers parted, and have
seldom met again. Both may have visited the same
mansions, but not at the same time; for one was
bidden
to the festal hall, and the other to the
sick-chamber
;
he was the guest of Pleasure and Prosperity, and
she of Anguish. Rose, after their separation, was long
secluded within the dwelling of Mr. Toothaker, whom
she married with the revengeful hope of breaking her
false lover's heart. She went to her bridegroom's arms
with bitterer tears, they say, than young girls ought to
shed, at the threshold of the bridal chamber. Yet,
though her husband's head was getting gray, and his
heart had been chilled with an autumnal frost, Rose
soon began to love him, and wondered at her own
conjugal
affection. He was all she had to love; there
were no children.
In a year or two, poor Mr. Toothaker was visited
with a wearisome infirmity, which settled in his joints,
and made him weaker than a child. He crept forth
about his business, and came home at dinner time and
eventide, not with the manly tread that gladdens a
wife's heart, but slowly  feebly  jotting down each
dull footstep with a melancholy dub of his staff. We
must pardon his pretty wife, if she sometimes blushed
to own him. Her visiters, when they heard him
coming
,
looked for the appearance of some old, old man;
but he dragged his nerveless limbs into the parlor
and there was Mr. Toothaker! The disease
increasing
,
he never went into the sunshine, save with a staff
in his right hand, and his left on his wife's shoulder,
bearing heavily downward, like a dead man's hand.
Thus, a slender woman, still looking maiden-like, she
supported his tall, broad-chested frame along the
pathway
of their little garden, and plucked the roses for
her gray-haired husband, and spoke soothingly, as to
an infant. His mind was palsied with his body; its
utmost energy was peevishness. In a few months more,
she helped him up the staircase, with a pause at every
step, and a longer one upon the landing-place, and a
heavy glance behind, as he crossed the threshold of
his chamber. He knew, poor man, that the precincts
of those four walls would thenceforth be his world
his world, his home, his tomb  at once a dwelling
and a burial-place, till he were borne to a darker and
a narrower one. But Rose was with him in the tomb.
He leaned upon her, in his daily passage from the bed
to the chair by the fireside, and back again from the
weary chair to the joyless bed  his bed and hers
their marriage-bed; till even this short journey ceased,
and his head lay all day upon the pillow, and hers all
night beside it. How long poor Mr. Toothaker was
kept in misery! Death seemed to draw near the door,
and often to lift the latch, and sometimes to thrust his
ugly skull into the chamber, nodding to Rose, and
pointing at her husband, but still delayed to enter.
`This bed-ridden wretch cannot escape me!' quoth
Death. `I will go forth, and run a race with the swift,
and fight a battle with the strong, and come back for
Toothaker at my leisure!' Oh, when the deliverer
came so near, in the dull anguish of her worn-out
sympathies, did she never long to cry, `Death, come
in!'
But, no! We have no right to ascribe such a wish
to our friend Rose. She never failed in a wife's duty
to her poor sick husband. She murmured not, though
a glimpse of the sunny sky was as strange to her as
him, nor answered peevishly, though his complaining
accents roused her from her sweetest dream, only to
share his wretchedness. He knew her faith, yet
nourished
a cankered jealousy; and when the slow disease
had chilled all his heart, save one lukewarm spot,
which Death's frozen fingers were searching for, his
last words were: `What would my Rose have done
for her first love, if she has been so true and kind to
a sick old man like me!' And then his poor soul
crept away, and left the body lifeless, though hardly
more so than for years before, and Rose a widow,
though in truth it was the wedding night that widowed
her. She felt glad, it must be owned, when Mr.
Toothaker
was buried, because his corpse had retained such
a likeness to the man half alive, that she hearkened
for the sad murmur of his voice, bidding her shift his
pillow. But all through the next winter, though the
grave had held him many a month, she fancied him
calling from that cold bed, `Rose! Rose! come put
a blanket on my feet!'
So now the Rosebud was the Widow Toothaker.
Her troubles had come early, and, tedious as they
seemed, had passed before all her bloom was fled.
She was still fair enough to captivate a bachelor, or,
with a widow's cheerful gravity, she might have won
a widower, stealing into his heart in the very guise of
his dead wife. But the Widow Toothaker had no such
projects. By her watchings and continual cares, her
heart had become knit to her first husband with a
constancy
which changed its very nature, and made her
love him for his infirmities, and infirmity for his sake.
When the palsied old man was gone, even her early
lover could not have supplied his place. She had
dwelt in a sick-chamber, and been the companion of
a half-dead wretch, till she should scarcely breathe in
a free air, and felt ill at ease with the healthy and the
happy. She missed the fragrance of the doctor's stuff.
She walked the chamber with a noiseless foot-fall. If
visiters came in, she spoke in soft and soothing
accents
,
and was startled and shocked by their loud
voices. Often, in the lonesome evening, she looked
timorously from the fireside to the bed, with almost a
hope of recognising a ghastly face upon the pillow.
Then went her thoughts sadly to her husband's grave.
If one impatient throb had wronged him in his lifetime
if she had secretly repined, because her buoyant
youth was imprisoned with his torpid age  if ever,
while slumbering beside him, a treacherous dream had
admitted another into her heart  yet the sick man
had been preparing a revenge, which the dead now
claimed. On his painful pillow, he had cast a spell
around her; his groans and misery had proved more
captivating charms than gayety and youthful grace;
in his semblance, Disease itself had won the Rosebud
for a bride; nor could his death dissolve the nuptials.
By that indissoluble bond she had gained a home in
every sick-chamber, and nowhere else; there were
her brethren and sisters; thither her husband
summoned
her, with that voice which had seemed to issue
from the grave of Toothaker. At length she
recognised
her destiny.
We have beheld her as the maid, the wife, the
VOL. II. 22
widow; now we see her in a separate and insulated
character: she was, in all her attributes, Nurse
Toothaker
.
And Nurse Toothaker alone, with her own
shriveled
lips, could make known her experience in that
capacity. What a history might she record of the
great sicknesses, in which she has gone hand in hand
with the exterminating angel! She remembers when
the small-pox hoisted a red-banner on almost every
house along the street. She has witnessed when the
typhus fever swept off a whole household, young and
old, all but a lonely mother, who vainly shrieked to
follow her last loved one. Where would be Death's
triumph, if none lived to weep! She can speak of
strange maladies that have broken out, as if
spontaneously
,
but were found to have been imported from
foreign lands, with rich silks and other merchandise,
the costliest portion of the cargo. And once, she
recollects
,
the people died of what was considered a new
pestilence, till the doctors traced it to the ancient grave
of a young girl, who thus caused many deaths a
hundred
years after her own burial. Strange that such
black mischief should lurk in a maiden's grave! She
loves to tell how strong men fight with fiery fevers,
utterly refusing to give up their breath; and how
consumptive
virgins fade out of the world, scarcely
reluctant
,
as if their lovers were wooing them to a far
country. Tell us, thou fearful woman! tell us the
death-secrets! Fain would I search out the meaning
of words, faintly gasped with intermingled sobs, and
broken sentences, half audibly spoken between earth
and the judgment-seat!
An awful woman! She is the patron-saint of young
physicians, and the bosom friend of old ones. In the
mansions where she enters, the inmates provide
themselves
black garments; the coffin-maker follows her;
and the bell tolls as she comes away from the
threshold
.
Death himself has met her at so many a
bedside
,
that he puts forth his bony hand to greet Nurse
Toothaker. She is an awful woman! And, oh! is
it conceivable, that this handmaid of human infirmity
and affliction  so darkly stained, so thoroughly
imbued
with all that is saddest in the doom of mortals
can ever again be bright and gladsome, even though
bathed in the sunshine of eternity? By her long
communion
with woe, has she not forfeited her inheritance
of immortal joy? Does any germ of bliss survive
within her?
Hark! an eager knocking at Nurse Toothaker's
door. She starts from her drowsy reverie, sets aside
the empty tumbler and tea-spoon, and lights a lamp
at the dim embers of the fire. Rap, rap, rap! again;
and she burries adown the staircase, wondering which
of her friends can be at death's door now, since there
is such an earnest messenger at Nurse Toothaker's.
Again the peal resounds, just as her hand is on the
lock. `Be quick, Nurse Toothaker!' cries a man on
the door-step; `old General Fane is taken with the
gout in his stomach, and has sent for you to watch by
his death-bed. Make haste, for there is no time to
lose!' `Fane! Edward Fane! And has he sent
for me at last? I am ready! I will get on my cloak
and begone. So,' adds the sable-gowned, ashen-
visaged
,
funereal old figure, `Edward Fane remembers
his Rosebud!'
Our question is answered. There is a germ of bliss
within her. Her long-hoarded constancy  her
memory
of the bliss that was  remaining amid the gloom
of her after life, like a sweet-smelling flower in
a coffin, is a symbol that all may be renewed. In
some happier clime, the Rosebud may revive again
with all the dew-drops in its bosom.
THE THREEFOLD DESTINY.
A FARY LEGEND.
I have
sometimes produced a singular and not
unpleasing
effect, so far as my own mind was concerned,
by imagining a train of incidents, in which the spirit
and mechanism of the fary legend should be
combined
with the characters and manners of familiar
life. In the little tale which follows, a subdued tinge
of the wild and wonderful is thrown over a sketch of
New England personages and scenery, yet, it is hoped,
without entirely obliterating the sober hues of nature.
Rather than a story of events claiming to be real, it
may be considered as an allegory, such as the writers
of the last century would have expressed in the
shape of an eastern tale, but to which I have
endeavored
to give a more life-like warmth than could
be infused into those fanciful productions.
In the twilight of a summer eve, a tall, dark figure,
over which long and remote travel had thrown an
outlandish aspect, was entering a village, not in
`Fary Londe,' but within our own familiar
boundaries
.
The staff, on which this traveller leaned, had
been his companion from the spot where it grew, in
the jungles of Hindostan; the hat, that overshadowed
his sombre brow, had shielded him from the suns of
Spain; but his cheek had been blackened by the
red-hot wind of an Arabian desert, and had felt the
frozen breath of an Arctic region. Long sojourning
amid wild and dangerous men, he still wore beneath
his vest the ataghan which he had once struck into
the throat of a Turkish robber. In every foreign
clime he had lost something of his New England
characteristics; and, perhaps, from every people he
had unconsciously borrowed a new peculiarity; so
that when the world-wanderer again trod the street of
his native village, it is no wonder that he passed
unrecognised
,
though exciting the gaze and curiosity of
all. Yet, as his arm casually touched that of a young
woman, who was wending her way to an evening
lecture
,
she started, and almost uttered a cry.
`Ralph Cranfield!' was the name that she half
articulated.
`Can that be my old playmate, Faith Egerton?'
thought the traveller, looking round at her figure, but
without pausing.
Ralph Cranfield, from his youth upward, had felt
himself marked out for a high destiny. He had
imbibed
the idea  we say not whether it were revealed
to him by witchcraft, or in a dream of prophecy, or
that his brooding fancy had palmed its own dictates
upon him as the oracles of a Sybil  but he had
imbibed
the idea, and held it firmest among his articles
of faith, that three marvellous events of his life were
to be confirmed to him by three signs.
The first of these three fatalities, and perhaps the
one on which his youthful imagination had dwelt
most fondly, was the discovery of the maid, who
alone, of all the maids on earth, could make him
happy by her love. He was to roam around the
world till he should meet a beautiful woman, wearing
on her bosom a jewel in the shape of a heart; whether
of pearl, or ruby, or emerald, or carbuncle, or a
changeful opal, or perhaps a priceless diamond, Ralph
Cranfield little cared, so long as it were a heart of
one peculiar shape. On encountering this lovely
stranger, he was bound to address her thus:  `
Maiden
,
I have brought you a heavy heart. May I rest
its weight on you?' And if she were his fated
bride  if their kindred souls were destined to form a
union here below, which all eternity should only bind
more closely  she would reply, with her finger on
the heart-shaped jewel:  `This token, which I have
worn so long, is the assurance that you may!'
And secondly, Ralph Cranfield had a firm belief
that there was a mighty treasure hidden somewhere
in the earth, of which the burial-place would be
revealed to none but him. When his feet should
press upon the mysterious spot, there would be a hand
before him, pointing downward  whether carved of
marble, or hewn in gigantic dimensions on the side of
a rocky precipice, or perchance a hand of flame in
empty air, he could not tell; but, at least, he would
discern a hand, the fore-finger pointing downward,
and beneath it the Latin word
Effode
Dig! And
digging thereabouts, the gold in coin or ingots, the
precious stones, or of whatever else the treasure might
consist, would be certain to reward his toil.
The third and last of the miraculous events in the
life of this high-destined man, was to be the
attainment
of extensive influence and sway over his
fellow-creatures
.
Whether he were to be a king, and founder
of an hereditary throne, or the victorious leader of a
people contending for their freedom, or the apostle of
a purified and regenerated faith, was left for futurity
to show. As messengers of the sign, by which
Ralph Cranfield might recognise the summons, three
venerable men were to claim audience of him. The
chief among them, a dignified and majestic person,
arrayed, it may be supposed, in the flowing
garments
of an ancient sage, would be the bearer of a
wand, or prophet's rod. With this wand, or rod, or
staff, the venerable sage would trace a certain figure
in the air, and then proceed to make known his
heaven-instructed message; which, if obeyed, must
lead to glorious results.
With this proud fate before him, in the flush of his
imaginative youth, Ralph Cranfield had set forth to
seek the maid, the treasure, and the venerable sage,
with his gift of extended empire. And had he found
them? Alas! it was not with the aspect of a
triumphant
man, who had achieved a nobler destiny than
all his fellows, but rather with the gloom of one
struggling
against peculiar and continual adversity, that
he now passed homeward to his mother's cottage.
He had come back, but only for a time, to lay aside the
pilgrim's staff, trusting that his weary manhood would
regain somewhat of the elasticity of youth, in the spot
where his threefold fate had been foreshown him.
There had been few changes in the village; for it
was not one of those thriving places where a year's
prosperity makes more than the havoc of a century's
decay; but like a gray hair in a young man's head,
an antiquated little town, full of old maids, and aged
elms, and moss-grown dwellings. Few seemed to
be the changes here. The drooping elms, indeed,
had a more majestic spread; the weather-blackened
houses were adorned with a denser thatch of
verdant
moss; and doubtless there were a few more
grave-stones in the burial-ground, inscribed with
names that had once been familiar in the village
street. Yet, summing up all the mischief that ten
years had wrought, it seemed scarcely more than if
Ralph Cranfield had gone forth that very morning,
and dreamed a day-dream till the twilight, and then
turned back again. But his heart grew cold, because
the village did not remember him as he remembered
the village.
`Here is the change!' sighed he, striking his hand
upon his breast. `Who is this man of thought and
care, weary with world-wandering, and heavy with
disappointed hopes? The youth returns not, who
went forth so joyously!'
And now Ralph Cranfield was at his mother's gate,
in front of the small house where the old lady, with
slender but sufficient means, had kept herself
comfortable
during her son's long absence. Admitting
himself within the enclosure, he leaned against a
great, old tree, trifling with his own impatience, as
people often do in those intervals when years are
summed into a moment. He took a minute survey
of the dwelling  its windows, brightened with the
sky gleam, its door-way, with the half of a mill-stone for
a step, and the faintly-traced path waving thence to
the gate. He made friends again with his childhood's
friend, the old tree against which he leaned; and
glancing his eye adown its trunk, beheld something
that excited a melancholy smile. It was a half-
obliterated
inscription  the Latin word EFFODE  which
he remembered to have carved in the bark of the
tree, with a whole day's toil, when he had first
begun
to muse about his exalted destiny. It might be
accounted a rather singular coincidence, that the bark,
just above the inscription, had put forth an
excrescence
,
shaped not unlike a hand, with the fore-finger
pointing obliquely at the word of fate. Such, at
least, was its appearance in the dusky light.
`Now a credulous man,' said Ralph Cranfield
carelessly
to himself, `might suppose that the treasure
which I have sought round the world, lies buried,
after
all, at the very door of my mother's dwelling.
That would be a jest indeed!'
More he thought not about the matter; for now the
door was opened, and an elderly woman appeared
on the threshold, peering into the dusk to discover
who it might be that had intruded on her premises,
and was standing in the shadow of her tree. It was
Ralph Cranfield's mother. Pass we over their
greeting
,
and leave the one to her joy and the other to his
rest  if quiet rest he found.
But when morning broke, he arose with a troubled
brow; for his sleep and his wakefulness had alike
been full of dreams. All the fervor was
rekindled
with which he had burned of yore to unravel
the threefold mystery of his fate. The crowd of his
early visions seemed to have awaited him beneath his
mother's roof, and thronged riotously around to
welcome his return. In the well-remembered
chamber
on the pillow where his infancy had
slumbered
he had passed a wilder night than ever in
an Arab tent, or when he had reposed his head in
the ghastly shades of a haunted forest. A shadowy
maid had stolen to his bedside, and laid her finger on
the scintillating heart; a hand of flame had glowed
amid the darkness, pointing downward to a mystery
within the earth; a hoary sage had waved his
prophetic
wand, and beckoned the dreamer onward to a
chair of state. The same phantoms, though fainter
in the daylight, still flitted about the cottage, and
mingled among the crowd of familiar faces that were
drawn thither by the news of Ralph Cranfield's
return
,
to bid him welcome for his mother's sake.
There they found him, a tall, dark, stately man, of
foreign aspect, courteous in demeanor and mild of
speech, yet with an abstracted eye, which seemed
often to snatch a glance at the invisible.
Meantime the widow Cranfield went bustling about
the house, full of joy that she again had somebody to
love, and be careful of, and for whom she might
vex and tease herself with the petty troubles of daily
life. It was nearly noon, when she looked forth
from the door, and descried three personages of
note coming along the street, through the hot
sunshine
and the masses of elm-tree shade. At length
they reached her gate, and undid the latch.
`See, Ralph!' exclaimed she, with maternal pride,
`here is Squire Hawkwood and the two other
selectmen
,
coming on purpose to see you! Now do tell
them a good long story about what you have seen in
foreign parts.'
The foremost of the three visiters, Squire
Hawkwood
,
was a very pompous, but excellent old
gentleman
,
the head and prime mover in all the affairs of
the village, and universally acknowledged to be one
of the sagest men on earth. He wore, according to
a fashion even then becoming antiquated, a three-
cornered
hat, and carried a silver-headed cane, the use
of which seemed to be rather for flourishing in the
air than for assisting the progress of his legs. His
two companions were elderly and respectable
yeomen
,
who, retaining an ante-revolutionary reverence
for rank and hereditary wealth, kept a little in the
Squire's rear. As they approached along the
pathway
,
Ralph Cranfield sat in an oaken elbow-chair,
half unconsciously gazing at the three visiters, and
enveloping their homely figures in the misty romance
that pervaded his mental world.
`Here,' thought he, smiling at the conceit, `here
come three elderly personages, and the first of the
three is a venerable sage with a staff. What if this
embassy should bring me the message of my fate!'
While Squire Hawkwood and his colleagues
entered
,
Ralph rose from his seat, and advanced a few
steps to receive them; and his stately figure and dark
countenance, as he bent courteously towards his guests,
had a natural dignity; contrasting well with the
bustling
importance of the Squire. The old gentleman,
according to invariable custom, gave an elaborate
preliminary flourish with his cane in the air, then
removed
his three-corned hat in order to wipe his brow,
and finally proceeded to make known his errand.
`My colleagues and myself,' began the Squire,
`are burthened with momentous duties, being jointly
selectmen of this village. Our minds, for the space
of three days past, have been laboriously bent on the
selection of a suitable person to fill a most important
office, and take upon himself a charge and rule, which,
wisely considered, may be ranked no lower than
those of kings and potentates. And whereas you,
our native townsman, are of good natural intellect,
and well cultivated by foreign travel, and that certain
vagaries and fantasies of your youth are doubtless
long ago corrected; taking all these matters, I say,
into due consideration, we are of opinion that
Providence
hath sent you hither, at this juncture, for our
very purpose.'
During this harangue, Cranfield gazed fixedly at
the speaker, as if he beheld something mysterious
and unearthly in his pompous little figure, and as if
the Squire had worn the flowing robes of an ancient
sage, instead of a square-skirted coat, flapped
waistcoat
,
velvet breeches and silk stockings. Nor was
his wonder without sufficient cause; for the flourish
of the Squire's staff, marvellous to relate, had
described
precisely the signal in the air which was to
ratify the message of the prophetic Sage, whom
Cranfield had sought around the world.
`And what,' inquired Ralph Cranfield, with a
tremor
in his voice, `what may this office be, which is
to equal me with kings and potentates?'
`No less than instructer of our village school,'
answered
Squire Hawkwood; `the office being now
vacant by the death of the venerable Master
Whitaker
,
after a fifty years' incumbency.'
`I will consider of your proposal,' replied Ralph
Cranfield, hurriedly, `and will make known my
decision
within three days.'
After a few more words, the village dignitary and
his companions took their leave. But to Cranfield's
fancy their images were still present, and became
more and more invested with the dim awfulness of
figures which had first appeared to him in a dream,
and afterwards had shown themselves in his waking
moments, assuming homely aspects among familiar
things. His mind dwelt upon the features of the
Squire, till they grew confused with those of the
visionary Sage, and one appeared but the shadow
of the other. The same visage, he now thought, had
looked forth upon him from the Pyramid of Cheops;
the same form had beckoned to him among the
colonnades of the Alhambra; the same figure had
VOL. II. 23
mistily revealed itself through the ascending steam
of the Great Geyser. At every effort of his memory
he recognised some trait of the dreamy Messenger of
Destiny, in this pompous, bustling, self-important,
little
great man of the village. Amid such musings,
Ralph Cranfield sat all day in the cottage, scarcely
hearing and vaguely answering his mother's thousand
questions about his travels and adventures. At
sunset
,
he roused himself to take a stroll, and, passing
the aged elm tree, his eye was again caught by the
semblance of a hand, pointing downward at the
half-obliterated
inscription.
As Cranfield walked down the street of the village,
the level sunbeams threw his shadow far before him;
and he fancied that, as his shadow walked among
distant objects, so had there been a presentiment
stalking in advance of him throughout his life. And
when he drew near each object, over which his tall
shadow had preceded him, still it proved to be one of
the familiar recollections of his infancy and youth.
Every crook in the pathway was remembered.
Even the more transitory characteristics of the scene
were the same as in by-gone days. A company of
cows were grazing on the grassy road-side, and
refreshed
him with their fragrant breath. `It is
sweeter
,'
thought he, `than the perfume which was wafted
to our ship from the Spice Islands.' The round little
figure of a child rolled from a door-way, and lay
laughing, almost beneath Cranfield's feet. The dark
and stately man stooped down, and lifting the infant,
restored him to his mother's arms. `The children,'
said he to himself  and sighed, and smiled  `the
children are to be my charge!' And while a flow
of natural feeling gushed like a well-spring in his
heart, he came to a dwelling which he could nowise
forbear to enter. A sweet voice, which seemed to
come from a deep and tender soul, was warbling a
plaintive little air, within.
He bent his head, and passed through the lowly
door. As his foot sounded upon the threshold, a
young woman advanced from the dusky interior of
the house, at first hastily, and then with a more
uncertain
step, till they met face to face. There was a
a singular contrast in their two figures; he dark and
picturesque  one who had battled with the world
whom all suns had shone upon, and whom all winds
had blown on a varied course; she neat, comely, and
quiet  quiet even in her agitation  as if all her
emotions had been subdued to the peaceful tenor of
her life. Yet their faces, all unlike as they were,
had an expression that seemed not so alien  a glow
of kindred feeling, flashing upward anew from
half-extinguished
embers.
`You are welcome home!' said Faith Egerton.
But Cranfield did not immediately answer; for his
eye had been caught by an ornament in the shape of
a Heart, which Faith wore as a brooch upon her
bosom
.
The material was the ordinary white quartz;
and he recollected having himself shaped it out of
one of those Indian arrow-heads, which are so often
found in the ancient haunts of the red men. It was
precisely on the pattern of that worn by the
visionary
Maid. When Cranfield departed on his shadowy
search he had bestowed this brooch, in a gold setting,
as a parting gift to Faith Egerton.
`So, Faith, you have kept the Heart!' said he, at
length.
`Yes,' said she, blushing deeply  then more gaily,
`and what else have you brought me from beyond
the sea?'
`Faith!' replied Ralph Cranfield, uttering the
fated words by an uncontrollable impulse, `I have
brought you nothing but a heavy heart! May I rest
its weight on you?'
`This token, which I have worn so long,' said
Faith, laying her tremulous finger on the Heart, `is
the assurance that you may!'
`Faith! Faith!' cried Cranfield, clasping her in
his arms, `you have interpreted my wild and weary
dream!'
Yes; the wild dreamer was awake at last. To find
the mysterious treasure, he was to till the earth around
his mother's dwelling, and reap its products! Instead
of warlike command, or regal or religious sway, he
was to rule over the village children! And now the
visionary Maid had faded from his fancy, and in her
place he saw the playmate of his childhood! Would
all, who cherish such wild wishes, but look around
them, they would oftenest find their sphere of duty,
of prosperity, and happiness, within those precincts,
and in that station, where Providence itself has cast
their lot. Happy they who read the riddle, without
a weary world-search, or a lifetime spent in vain!
THE END.