B
THE
ITALIAN SKETCH BOOK. INTRODUCTION.
There
are countries of the globe which possess a
permanent and peculiar interest in human
estimation
;
an interest proportioned in each individual to
his intelligence, culture and philanthropy. They
are those where the most momentous historical events
occurred, and civilization first dawned; and of which
the past associations and present influences are,
consequently
,
in a high degree exciting. The history
of these lands affords one of our most attractive
sources of philosophical truth, as the reminiscences
they induce excite poetical sentiment; and, hence,
we very naturally regard a visit to them as an event
singularly interesting, not to say morally important.
And yet personal impressions, on such occasions,
are confessedly dependent upon circumstances which
are, for the most part, uncontrollable. There are,
however, certain positive methods, the adoption of
which will not, indeed, bring about a complete
agreement in the notions and sentiments of
travellers
,
but will tend to a much more useful purpose
that of inducing a satisfactory result upon their
own minds. Among these is a sense of the true
nature of the comprehensive object they are about
to contemplate; a patient determination to bestow
a degree of time and study in a measure
corresponding
with the subject; a preparedness for
disappointment
,
and an unyielding spirit of candour. Such a
state of mind will especially influence happily the
experience of the trans-atlantic sojourner in Italy,
since it may not be denied that many things exist
there, to qualify the enjoyment of the enthusiastic
expectant, who has turned the eye of his
imagination
thither through the long and magnifying space
which divides our continent from the old world.
The invalid discovers that even these genial
regions
are not exempt from wintry influences; the
ardent observer must grieve to find the most
interesting
ruins contiguous to, and even invaded by, the
scenes of ordinary life, and the more conventional
characteristics of the country fast disappearing
before
the ever increasing encroachments of the stranger
multitude; while the benevolent are constantly pained
by the sight of distress which they cannot alleviate.
Yet, perhaps, these very drawbacks tend to direct
attention more completely to the many existing
sources of satisfaction, and they certainly are not
without a moral benefit. Never does the paramount
importance of the innate habit and the comparative
worthlessness of the outward scene become so
self-evident
,
as when we thus
feel
the superiority of
anticipation
to enjoyment. And we know not, until
standing by the spots renowned as the scenes of
mighty exploits, denuded of the exhaustless drapery
of fancy, that it is the acts themselves, with all their
beautiful philosophy, which alone have hallowed
these portions of earth.
But frequent and favourable observation
will
develope
the legitimate influences of Italy, and render
us less and less sensible to untoward or disagreeable
circumstances. Antiquity will become, in our view,
more sacred; art will awaken a deeper interest;
society
will discover new charms; and, when we start
upon our homeward pilgrimage, we shall perceive,
with a sensation of wonder, the strength of the
chain which binds us to the land, and realize the
subtle power of the agencies which have so silently
weaved it.
The impressions of an individual mind, noted
during a considerable interval of time, will therefore
possess more of this deliberate and eventual
character
.
In imparting them, it seems unwise, at least,
to run into the common error of portraying minutely
the details of statutes, paintings and edifices
descriptions
,
which often have the effect of exciting
without satisfying curiosity; while graphic
delineations
of manners and customs have been too
frequently
and faithfully drawn to be attempted in the
present instance. The aim has rather been to lead
from particular descriptions, to the moral
contemplation
of such general subjects, as are prominently
indicative of the scenes and intellectual influences
of Italy.
B 2
ROME.
The Niobe of nations! there she stands,
Childless and crownless, in her voiceless woe;
An empty urn within her withered hands,
Whose holy dust was scattered long ago.
Yet, this is Rome,
That sat upon her seven hills, and, from her throne
Of beauty, rul'd the world! Yet these are Romans.
Why, in that elder day, to be a Roman
Was greater than a king!
THE FORUM, ARCHES, AQUEDUCTS, AND
TOMB OF THE SCIPIOS.
It
was in the light of a clear atmosphere that we
stood upon the summit of the Capitol, and
thoughtfully
gazed forth upon the city with its
mountain-wall
circling broadly in the distance. From so
commanding a position, we were enabled to expand
the faint idea into a sensible conception of the site
of ancient Rome, and the relative localities and
original aspect of her scattered and dimly defined
remains.
Directly beneath us stood a massive form, whose
sculptured and inscribed surface is uniformly tinged
with the melancholy hue imparted by the earth
which so recently encrusted it, and deepened by the
lapse of ages. And yet, beneath that arch have
earth's most splendid pageants passed; eyes bedewed
with the rich tears of grateful exultation, have dwelt
upon its now defaced splendour; its broad
foundations
,
resting heavily in their sunken bed, have
trembled beneath the proud tread of the triumphing,
and its concave rung with the inspiring shout of a
Roman greeting. It was the triumphal arch of
Septimius Severus.
Immediately beside it, in mournful
companionship
,
rise three mutilated columns, all that exists
of the noble tribute of gratitude raised by Augustus
to the god of thunder, when he returned unscathed
from the rush of his awful shaft. A slower but not
less sure agency has not passed negligently by the
monument, and the naked triumvirate, clustered, as
if in the `fellowship of grief,' but feebly represent
the living sentiment which gave them birth. The
same number of these erect and solitary relies,
lifting
their burdenless capitals in air, furnish the
commencement
of an outline which observation may
continue and imagination embody, of the temple of
Jupiter Stator. Cold chroniclers of thrilling times
are they; senseless spectators of what would kindle
even the enthusiastic, which else we might almost
envy. It seems as if something of pride yet
lingered
about these decayed remnants of a once
glorious
company. They bore the vaulted roof, which
echoed the most eloquent outpourings of moral
indignation
;
they stood around, silent and stern, when
about them were the not less inflexible forms of the
Roman soldiery, and the sudden gathering of her
alarmed citizens, and within, the deliberate and
imposing
presence of the accuser, and the pale
countenance
and hurried glances of the accusedfor it
was here that Cicero condemned Catiline. The
temples of Concord and of Peace, the one boasting
eight remaining columns, and the other three
fragmentary
arches, next attracted attention and
suggested
similar reminiscences.
But soon we were obliged to quit a scene so
absorbing in its suggestive influences, to wander
among the dense ranges of modern buildings, and
descry, here and there, a few pillars or other remains
of what once stood forth contributing their now
isolated symmetry to the formation of a beautiful
and perfect whole. The arches of Titus,
Constantine
and Janus respectively occupied and interested
us, particularly the former, from the sacred vessels
and symbols of the Jewish temple, exhibited in
basso relievo, upon its interior surface; the niches of
the latter are dispossessed of the statues which once
adorned them; the bronze fastenings which
connected
the stones are gone, and broad gaps mark
the violence with which they were extricated. In
the vicinity, I attentively perused the little square
arch erected by the jewellers of the Forum to
Septimius
and his wife, and passing on, observed the
pillars and site of the temples of Vesta and Fortune
transformed into churches.
When we found ourselves near the wonderful old
aqueducts contiguous to the walls, we were long
amused with the peculiarities and impressed with
the antiquated features of these strange and
extensive
remains. From some elevated positions, we
gained a view of the neighbouring mountains, lifting
their undulating forms beneath the vapory masses
of the dim atmosphere, and reflecting in faint yet
rich tints, the few rays of sunshine which struggled
through the leaden clouds. We had seen no general
view more congenial with the ruins or more
exciting
to the associations of Rome.
On another occasion we left the city by the
Appian Way, and were mindful of the circumstance
of St. Paul having entered by the identical road,
After a considerable walk, we reached the tomb of
the Scipios, situated by the road-side, and the
entrance
not distinguishable from other similar
gateways
,
except by the inscription. Entering this, we
soon came to the vault, secured merely with loose
wooden doors, and having no distinctive beauty.
With a guide and tapers we explored the dark and
chilly avenues of this tomb, pausing here and there
to con the many inscriptions which exist upon the
walls. Two of the sarcophagi are in the Vatican,
but one or two yet remain. We soon hastened from
this damp and melancholy sepulchre, whose earthy
floor was worn by the feet of many curious pilgrims,
like ourselves, and pondering upon the contrast
between
the men who once reposed there, their
probable
anticipations of their country and the present,
we extended our walk and penetrated far into the
labyrinthine catacombs beneath the church of St.
Sebastian.
ST. PETER'S.
At length we arrived at the noble square with its
sweeping colonnade and old obelisk, which are about
St. Peter's. Having entered that edifice and
immediately
passing through a side door, we commenced
ascending an inclined plane which winds round, is
bricked, and continues for a long distance until it
brings us out upon the roof. This wide space, with
its several cupolas, has been aptly compared to a
small village. We soon entered the first and second
interior gallery of the dome, and thence looked
down from an immense height upon the variegated
marble floor, or immediately around upon the coarse
mosaic figures. Still ascending, we reached the
lantern, and obtained a most comprehensive view,
embracing the city, the
campagna
, the distant
snow-covered
mountains, with a glimpse of the
Mediterranean
,
and having stood in the copper ball which
surmounts the whole building, we descended.
[1]
[1]
The necessity of attempting a description of this truly
indescribable building is most happily superseded by the
unrivalled
paintings of Panini, recently purchased by the Boston
Athenum. Let any one intently gaze upon the delineation
of the interior of St. Peter's, and imagine the space which
lies unrevealed in perspective, and he will obtain a more
definite
idea than any words can convey.
C
At one visit to St. Peter's, the several scenes
presented
most effectually aided me in realizing the
vastness
of the building. Two of the chapels were
filled with children receiving Sabbath instruction,
whose singing resounded pleasingly through the
expanse
.
In one corner, some lads, seemingly
designed
for the priesthood, were loudly engaged in a
dialogue, the purport of which was an exposition of
the church ceremonies; these were eagerly listened
to by a surrounding crowd. Around the circular
and illuminated railing, which is about the descent
to the tomb of the great apostle, kneeled many female
figures, and another knot were clustered beneath his
bronze image, and fervently kissing the worn foot;
while, scattered upon the far spreading pavement,
and bending at the numerous shrines, were many
devotees apparently absorbed in prayer. The
confession-boxes
,
too, were unusually occupied, and the
whole area thickly studded with the figures of those
whom curiosity or devotion had brought thither.
And yet these numerous and variously occupied
human beings seemed, in no degree, to lessen the
apparent space enclosed by those immense walls and
that exalted dome, but rather to increase the
impressiveness
of the whole. I ever gratefully remarked the
peculiar mildness and genial warmth of the
atmosphere
.
It is even pretended by some of the
inhabitants
,
that this phenomenon may be ascribed to the
heat, which the dense walls acquire during summer
a heat so great and so well retained as to continue
partially latent, and be evolved during the few
weeks when comparative coolness prevails. Many
circumstances, however, contribute to the production
of so pleasing an effect, particularly the admirable
exposure of the building to the full influence of
the sun, which beams through one or another of
its many windows, during nearly the whole day,
while the arrangement of the entrances almost
precludes the admission of the external air.
But it was my special delight to visit St. Peter's,
not critically to examine, but to yield myself freely
to its sublimity and beauty. Sometimes I would
rest in front of the monument to the last of the
Stuarts, to sympathize in the mournful
expression
of its basso relievo angels of death,
extinguishing
,
as if in sadness, the torch of life; or pause in
admiration of the lions of Canova surmounting
the tomb of Pope Clement XIII. As the
setting
sun shone gorgeously through the glory, over
the main altar, and lingered upon the gilded
cornices
of the wall, it was mysteriously exciting
to gaze on one of the splendid mosaic copies of
the most eminent originals; for instance, that of
Thomas satisfying his doubts. The perfect serenity
of our Saviour's countenance, the determined
inspection
of the incredulous apostle, and, above all, the
sad, yet mild and affectionate expression of John,
riveted my gaze and touched my sensibilities. I
could almost believe that I saw a tremulous play
of the muscles, or living softness of the features, as
they were thus revealed in the twilight.
It was surpassingly interesting to roam through
the quiet and rich precincts of this magnificent
edifice
,
with an elevating sense of its excellence as a
place of religious enjoyment. There is a freedom,
a nobleness, a grandeur about St. Peter's, allied to
intellect and sentiment in their higher
manifestations
.
Within no structure, perhaps, does the
human
form dwindle to greater apparent insignificance,
but in few spots does man yield more spontaneously
and legitimately to a sense of his capacity for
excellence
.
The idea that the building, which is filling
and delighting his spirit, was planned by the
intellect
and reared by the labour of his species, and the
thought of that Being to whose praises it is devoted
all this suggests itself with the view and its
enjoyment
.
Indeed, familiarity with the splendid temples of
worship for which Italy is remarkable, rather
augments
than diminishes the spontaneous admiration
which a first inspection of them excites; or rather,
the primary emotions of pleasure melt into a calm
sentiment of satisfaction, far more favourable to a
discriminating view and just impression. The still
but most efficient teachings of those three happy
influences, painting, sculpture and architecture, seem
here combined for the most felicitous ends. I
could not but often think of it as one of those
consoling
and redeeming things, which modify all the
evil in the world, that these were places dedicated
to Catholicism, but open to all and at all times;
places for reflection, devotion and thought, where
one can wander contemplatively, the painted
windows
imparting a mellow light in which the pictured
and sculptured forms seemed living things, and the
notes of the chanters falling in reverberated echoes
upon the ear, and worship after his own heart, or
muse holily till the fire burns.
C 2
ST. PIETRO IN VINCULI AND THE
CAPUCHIN CONVENT.
It was on a day marked by that deep azure, that
seemingly penetrable density of the sky, so often
celebrated by poets as the most enchanting natural
feature of southern Italy, that we were early on our
way to the Esquiline hill. Upon its summit stands,
in comparative solitude, the church of St. Pietro in
Vinculi, built to contain the chains of the great
apostle
whose name it bears. The effect ever derivable
from simplicity, is signally exemplified upon
entering
this chaste building; for its interior architecture
opens at once upon the vision, and, in its simple
grandeur
,
imparts a far more delightful impression, than
is often obtained from more extensive and gorgeous
constructions. The form of the Basilica is here
admirably
preserved, the arched roof being supported
by two rows of beautiful columns, and the whole
space unbroken by any intermediate arches. These
columns, as well as the pavement of the sacristy,
were originally obtained from the baths of Titus;
the former are remarkably impregnated with
sulphate
of lime, so as to emit a sulphurous odour when
slightly rubbed. Behind the altar is a richly wrought
marble chair, probably a consular seat, obtained
from the same ruins; the idea that Cicero might
once have occupied it, occurred to us, and increased
the interest with which we viewed so pleasing and
authentic a Roman relic. Most of the pictures and
frescos are illustrative of St. Peter's imprisonment
and angelic enfranchisement; and within two brazen
and embossed doors, are preserved the sacred fetters,
which are exposed to view only once a year.
But the grand attraction which had drawn us to
this church was a renowned work of artthe
statue
of Moses by Michael Angelo. This collossal
figure at once evinces the workmanship of a
peculiar
genius, the design differing wholly from what is
familiar in statuary. There is a muscular power, a
grandeur of outline, which sufficiently indicate the
author. Indignation and awful energy are distinctly
discernible in the heavy frown and stern expression
of God's chosen messenger to a guilty and erring
people.
The Capuchin conventan example of another
class of churchesimparts a very tolerable idea of
the dreariness and sternness of a genuine monastic
retreat. The lay brother who conducted us looked
wonderfully thriving, and was withal surprisingly
affable for an old denizen of the damp and gloomy
apartments which he so complacently displayed.
The church, though by no means magnificent,
contains
two frescos of great interest:one representing
the archangel Michael triumphing over Satan, whose
dark brawny form seems completely subdued
beneath
the light foot of his beautiful conqueror; the
other, a rough representation of St. Peter walking
on the wavesone of the most ancient examples of
this species of painting. Indeed this convent is
many
centuries old, and the very hue and primitive
material of the Capuchin garb comport admirably
with the antique appearance of the whole building
and its contents. But the greatest peculiarity is the
cemetery beneath. A number of arches extend some
distance, against the walls of which are piled an
immense number of the bones of the deceased
Capuchins
.
In spaces left about mid-way, are stretched
skeletons, clad in the habit of the order, and others
stand in various parts of the awful repository, while
the ground, composed of `holy earth,' transported
at great expense from Jerusalem, is marked as the
last resting-place of the later dead. The very lamps
which hang from the walls, are composed of bones,
and the same material, distributed most fantastically,
furnishes meet accompanying ornaments. Perhaps
this kind of burial, if such it may be called, is
one of the rarest in practice by moderns. The
effect by torch-light, when an interment takes place,
must be impressive in the extreme; though with
the broad light of day shining through the windows,
the scene seemed more hideous than morally
striking
;
nor can one easily feel that the intended honour
is conferred upon the unbroken skeletons, by
permitting
them to stand holding a card, upon which is
inscribed the name and age of the deceased, like
guardians of the mournful piles around them, in
which are merged the remains of their less
distinguished
brethren.
THE VATICAN.
We
crossed the Tiber in a broad barge, and
during
the few moments which intervened ere our walk
re-commenced, we were naturally led to contrast
the turbid waters and the dim earth around us, with
the same scene, in its transcendent aspect, as existing
in the familiar picture of our fancy. The one was
the plain appearance of neglected and perhaps
degenerate
nature; the other impressions derived from
nature's glowing commentator, the poet. Passing
by a retired path through the fields, we soon came
in view of a circular fortress, (the Castle of St.
Angelo
,)
now chiefly used as a prison, but originally
the tomb of Hadrian. And certainly, when its solid
proportions were decked with the numerous statuary
ornaments which once adorned them, it must have
formed a glorious final resting-place for a Roman.
There is a striking and melancholy inconsistency
observable in this, as in many instances, in the
modern
appropriation of ancient monuments. So much
more honourable is it to the general, or at least to
the better sentiment of mankind, to leave unmarred
the few remnants of a nation's greatness, when not
one of her children exists. There is surely a kind
of sacrilege in disturbing works consecrated to
the dead, for purposes of selfish pride or narrow
utility. The beauty, the interest, the blessed
inspiration
which so often hallow these ruins, are thus
invaded, while no commensurate advantage is
obtained
.
Have not as many smiles of ridicule or
sneers of reproach, as pious feelings, been awakened,
by the view of the apostle's figures surmounting the
triumphal pillars of Aurelius and Trajan? And
who can behold, without regret, the mausoleum of
the mighty dead transformed into a tomb for the
most wretched of the living?
We ascended a long flight of steps, entered a
square and corridor, and were soon in the Museum
of the Vatican. It were vain to endeavour to
describe
what an impression of the richness of art is
inspired by the first general inspection of this vast
collection of her redeemed trophies; and far more
to paint the vivid and elevating conception of her
power which dawns, brightens, and finally glows in
the bosom, as face after face of thrilling interest,
figure after figure of embodied nature, and gem after
gem of exquisite material or workmanship attracts
the admiring eye; all unanimated by one spiritual
principal, and yet so legitimately the offspring of
the highest, and so perfectly significant, as to awaken
wonder, enkindle delight, and finally win love. We
devoted a season to the inspection and admiration of
the time-worn frescos, which exist upon the walls of
the Camere of Raphael. Constantine's victory is,
indeed, a splendid battle-piece. But of all the
figures, none struck me as grander than the group
representing the miraculous defeat of the ravager of
the temple, struck down by a cavalier, and two
angels
,
at the prayer of the priest. Most of the
countenances
here depicted are separate and noble studies.
All the frescos were partially designed and executed
by Raphael. They present a worthy but
melancholy
monument to his genius, impaired as they are
by age, and marred by his untimely death. Yet
artists of the present day are continually studying
these dim, though most admirable remains, and find
in their contemplation the happiest aids and
incitements
.
Notwithstanding this speaking testimony
to departed excellence, as well as that which beamed
in the admiring looks of the gazers around, there
was something of sadness in the very air of rooms
that bore the name, and shone with the embodied
talent of the beloved and early dead, which forced
itself irresistibly upon the mind, and tinged with
mournfulness the gratified thoughts.
But it is when we stand for the first time in the
presence of that being, if aught destitute of sensation
deserve the name, it is when the eye first rests, and
the heart first fastens with instinctive eagerness upon
the Apollo Belvidere, that we feel the triumph of
human art. And there springs up a rich sentiment
of satisfaction, not only that the poetical in native
feeling, the pure in taste, and the exalted in thought
are conscious of unwonted gratification, but because
we rejoice in the spiritual nobility of our common
nature; we glory in the thought that the senseless
marble radiates the beautiful and deep
expressiveness
of intellectual life at the call of human genius,
and we are soothed by the testimony thus afforded
to the immortality of what we most love in ourselves
and kind, for we feel that such followers of nature
are allied to its author, and may humbly, but
legitimately
aspire to yet higher teachings than are
evolved from the physical universe.
D
GARDENS OF SALLUST.
I entered
, on a fine clear day, the large enclosed
tract called the Gardens of Sallust, being the site of
that beautiful historian's villa and grounds. There
are a few ill-defined ruins here situated, supposed to
be those of a temple dedicated to Venus Erycina,
and of the mansion, or its adjuncts. The general
aspect presented during my wanderings through
this extensive enclosure, was more in accordance
with the idea previously formed of the country than
any before obtained. The fertility of the grounds,
green with varied shrubbery and occasionally
beautified
with field-flowers, and thickly planted with
vegetables, among which groups of labourers were
actively engaged, afforded remarkable evidence of
the actual mildness of the climate; while occasional
glimpses of an old aqueduct, or wall, gave to the
scene the surpassing charm of antiquity. Constant
blasts of cold wind, in which the dry reeds rattled
sullenly, and the snow-capt Apennines in the
distance
were, however, sufficiently indicative of the
season. The free air and commanding situation of
this domain are well adapted to foster that concise
and clear energy, which so highly distinguishes
Sallust. If this was the favourite retreat to which
he retired to compose his history, it is not
surprising
that he found in the situation and his
employment
greater satisfaction than could be gleaned from
the enslaving luxury of the city, which lies so
attractively at the foot of his paternal mount. It
was a pleasant thought, that this very spot is that
which beguiled his early ambition from the
hazardous
efforts of a political arena, to the quiet and
dignified
employment of an elegant historian. And in
contemplating the result of this author's wise choice,
and comparing his with the lives of many of his
equally gifted countrymen, a new proof is afforded
of the surpassing excellence of well-directed
literary
labour. More peaceful and elevated passes the
existence, and more certain and purely succeeds the
renown of the useful and excellent writer, than that
of the most successful aspirant for immediate
popularity
.
There is, too, a beautiful completeness in
the works and fame of Sallust, such as seldom
marks the memory or the labours of modern writers.
Confining himself to one sphere, and intent upon
comparatively few subjects, he shone pre-eminently
in the one, and threw over the other a light and
vigour of delineation, which render his works not
only universally interesting, as just and vivid
chronicles
,
but as most attractive illustrations of the
capacities of his native language.
PONTE MOLLE.
I proceeded
at a similar season forth from the
city, by the spacious and beautiful entrance of the
Piazza del Popolo, towards the Ponte Molle. When
we reached this celebrated bridge, the beauty of the
adjacent country and distant scenery, as well as the
associations of the spot, detained me in long and
delightful contemplation. On the one side rises
Monte Mario, crowned with a verdant line of lofty
cypresses, and on the other, far away, stand the
hoary Apennine hills, while beneath runs the swift
and turbid Tiber. The picturesque, arched, and
heavy bridge on which I stood, still retaining
portions
of its ancient material, and the pervading
Sabbath
stillness, gave vividness and scope to the grand
scene of action, which memory and imagination
conjured up and arrayed upon its massive surface,
and along the broken banks of the river. But,
happily
,
in viewing the scene of Constantine's victory
and miraculous vision, we are not left to unaided
fancy in an attempt to renew the view preserved in
history. We have but to recall the almost living
delineation of Raphael, to arrive at a strong
conception
of what could otherwise be but vaguely and
variously fancied. It is on such occasions that we
learn to recognize one, among our many obligations,
to genius and art. Gazing, after the lapse of
centuries
,
upon the renowned battle-ground where tyranny
received a signal overthrow, from a Christian
warrior
eminent for victory, and finding nought but
the altered aspect of nature and a few decayed
relics of art, we can yet rehearse the history and the
song, and ponder the picture till they realize the
time-buried events of antiquity.
D 2
TOMB OF CECILIA METELLA.
It
was one of those days when a pensive stillness
pervades nature; the sky overclouded, yet
threatening
no rain, the sun peering dimly forth, and a quiet,
almost sad in its lifelessness, brooding over the
sullen fields and declining foliage; a day, in short,
the melancholy language of which brings something
of pleasure to the man of anxious temperament, and
to whose meditative influences even the practised
worldling not unwillingly yields himself; a day, on
which the student instinctively turns from his book
to ponder; the active denizen of the busy or gay
world is unwontedly and unwittingly thoughtful;
and many a day-dreamer or philosophical
sportsman
,
like old Walton, wanders longer through the
fields, and indulges in deeper imaginings and more
protracted reveries. Such a season was peculiarly
adapted to the purpose for which I had assigned it
a visit to the tomb of Cecilia Metella. The very
thought of it brings to mind Childe Harold's
characteristic
description:
There is a stern round tower of other days,
Firm as a fortress with its fence of stone,
Such as an army's baffled strength delays,
Standing with half its battlements alone,
And with two thousand years of ivy grown,
The garland of eternity, where wave
The green leaves over all by time o'erthrown;
What was this tower of strength? Within its cave
What treasures lie so lock'd, so hid?A woman's grave.
This celebrated ruin, one of the most satisfactory,
as regards its authenticity and preservation, among
all the Roman antiquities, is situated about a league
from the centre of the city, upon the Via Appia.
Its circular form and remarkably dense walls,
composed
on the exterior of marble, now partially
decomposed
,
proclaim its pristine magnificence. The
obscurity which veils the history and character of
her whose ashes it once contained, renders it, to one
at all given to vague imaginings, more eloquent than
if it were the concomitant of a most interesting and
elaborate chronicle. The inscription possesses the
same sublime simplicity, which is one of the noblest
indications of ancient Roman greatness, discoverable
in her monumental remains. As if, in announcing
the tomb to be that of Cecilia, wife of Crassus, and
daughter of Metellus, enough was expressed to
convey
every adequate impression to the beholder of
whatever age or country! The near kinswoman of
two Roman citizens;this one fact was deemed a
distinct indication to posterity of the actual nobility
of the entombed, while one glance at the splendid
sepulchre would convey ample testimony to her
worth and loss. But even we of later times, who
can smile at, while we admire such perfect
confidence
in the simple greatness of citizenship and
individual character, and who can gaze with the
coldness of curiosity upon such a relic, even we can
scarcely fancy any record capable of exciting such
awakening sentiment. It comports, in its brevity,
with the great lesson it teachesthe rapid flight
and levelling influence of time; and designating a
double ruin, it affords a degree of knowledge which,
if extended, would but carry out and define where
vagueness is desirable. For free scope is thus given
to a species of conjecture, which it is mournfully
pleasing to indulge. Standing by the massive
remains
of such a mausoleum, of which we can only
affirm that it was reared to the memory of a Roman
wife and daughterwhat trait of energetic beauty,
of affectionate devotion, of moral courage, which
enters into the
beau-ideal
of the female character,
may we not confidently ascribe to this? What a
life of secluded, yet elevated virtue, what a death of
solemn dignity might not have been hers! How
large a part might she have taken in refining, ay,
and nerving the spirit of husband and child and
brother,in producing that obsolete and wonderful
beinga Roman citizen! And if aught of such
fancies is correct, how like her earthly destiny to
that of innumerable of her sex, who live in the
exercise
of thoughts and sentiments, which, if
developed
through more conspicuous channels, would be
productive of deathless renown; but whose
self-sacrificing
administrations, though immeasurably
influential, are as unseen as those of a guardian
angel, while the memory of their authors is only
embalmed in Heaven, or darkly transmitted, like
that of Cecilia Metella, by the simple record of their
names and kindred, upon the monument which
conscientious
affection has reared.
THE COLISEUM.
Of
all impressions from antiquity, derived from the
ruins at Rome, none is more vivid and lasting than
that inspired by the Coliseum, when viewed under
circumstances best calculated for effect. Such are
the quiet and mystery, the shadowy aspect and mild
illumination of moonlight. Availing myself of a
season like this, it was with something of awe that
I approached to partake of a pleasure, in its very
nature melancholy, yet in the highest degree
attractive
to the imagination, and calculated to awaken
many of the deepest sentiments, especially those by
which the fellow-feeling of our race is nurtured and
sustained. And as the scene, in all its actual beauty,
environed by associations more impressive than its
past magnificence, and reposing in a light more
tender
than gleamed from the eager eyes, which once
shone out from its now dim arches, broke upon
my sight, I seemed to have come forth to hold
communion
not
with the material form, but with the
very spirit of antiquity. There, its massive walls
circling broadly, preeminent in lingering pride,
stands the Coliseum. As the monarch of ruins, its
dark outline seems defined with most commanding
prominence, while surrounding objects are lost or
blended in shade. Its many arched recesses are
rendered still more obscure by the veil of
shadow
,
or partially revealed in the congenial light.
Through some of them the silent stars may be seen
at their far-off vigils in the heavens, and again a
fragment, which the hand of time has spared,
abruptly
bars the view. Over some, the long grass,
that sad frieze which antiquity ever attaches to the
architecture of man, hangs motionless, and, as a
lattice, divides the falling moonbeams, or waves
gently in the night breeze. But it is when standing
beneath one of those arches, and vainly scanning
the length of the half-illumined corridor, or looking
down upon the grass-grown area, marked by a
single
path, that a sense of the events and times of
which this ruin is the monument, and its
suggestions
the epitaph, gradually gains upon the attention,
like the home thoughts which a strain of familiar
music has aroused. The gorgeous spectacle of
Rome's congregated wisdom and beauty thronging
the vast galleries, now lost or crumbling through
age, the glitter of wealth, the pomp of power, the
eagerness of curiosity, and the enthusiasm of varied
passions, which once rendered this a scene of
unequalled
pageantry,all come, at the call of memory,
to contrast themselves with the same scene now,
clad in the solemnity of solitude and decay.
But yet another retrospection, inducing deeper
emotions, occupies the mind and throws over the
scene a higher interest. What an amount of human
suffering have these dark walls witnessed! Could
they but speak, what a tale of horror would be
unfolded
!
How often has man, in all his savage or
his cultivated dignity, been abandoned in this wide
area to the beasts of the forest,more solitary when
surrounded by his unpitying kind, than when alone
with the lordly brute in his desert domain! How
much of human blood has this damp earth drunk,
and how often upon its clammy surface has the
human form been stretched in agony or death!
Nor was this the theatre of effort and woe only to
the physical nature. Who can estimate the pangs
of yearning affection which have wrung the
departing
spirit, the feeling of utter desolation with
which the barbarian has laid down his unsupported
head and died in the midst of his enemies? Who
can distinctly imagine the concentration of every
sentiment in that of the love of existence, which has
nerved the arm of the combatant, and the stern
despair with which he has at length relinquished his
dearly sold life? Far less might one hope to
realize
the deep energy with which the martyr to his
faith has here given proof of its power. There is
something holy in a spot which has witnessed the
voluntary sacrifice of existence to the cause of
Christianity. Of beautiful and sublime, as well as
terrible spectacles, has this been the scene. Where
has youth seemed so pure in its loveliness, or
manhood
so noble in its might, or age so venerable in
its majesty, as here? If, in this ruined
amphitheatre
,
humanity has been most debased, by the
despoiling
hand of cruelty, where has she exhibited
more of the sublimest of her energiesthe spirit of
self-sacrifice? Often as this air has wafted the sigh
and groans of suffering and remorse, has it not
likewise
borne upward the prayer of faith and the
thanksgiving of joyful confidence? Though glances
of ferocity and revenge have been turned, in
impotent
malignity, through this broad opening to the
smiling sky above, how often have eyes, beaming
with forgiving love, or fixed in religious fervour,
looked into its blue depths, from the awful death of
the Coliseum!
And yet, while the abandonment and decay of
Flavian's amphitheatre plainly indicate the
departure
of those ideas and customs, in accordance with
which it was reared, the question forcibly suggests
itself to the observer of its remains, has the
principle
,
which sustained so long an institution like this,
utterly and forever departed? Have we nothing in
our
experience, resembling what seems to have
originated
in a deeper sentiment than caprice, and
from its long continuance and popularity, has an
apparent foundation in our nature? The reply to
such self-interrogations is affirmative. What
student
of humanity, or observer of man, does not
recognize the same principle operating eternally?
Those who hold the system of Christianity, in its
E
purity, hold the whole philosophy of the principle.
Individual man has arrayed against him the varied
force of circumstances without and passion within.
Of the insidiousness, the power of these opponents,
who is ignorant? And there are, too, spectators
too often as heartless, curious, and cold lookers on,
as those which thronged the galleries of the
Coliseum
.
THE PANTHEON, PALACES, CHURCHES.
Next
to the Coliseum, as an architectural remain, is
the Pantheon. Its magnificent dome, antiquated
and immense pillars, and old pavement, combine to
realize the high anticipations with which it is
visited. The proximity of this grand building to
the scenes of ordinary life, exposed to the sounds
and influences ever present in populous cities, and
especially marred by the emblems of the popular
faith, and surrounded by the filth of a market-place
these are circumstances which strike one most
disagreeably
,
and break in most inharmoniously upon
his cherished associations.
The ruins called the `Baths of Caracalla,' are
massive and broken walls, indicative of former
magnificence
only from their number. Rank weeds
have quite overgrown the space which they enclose.
All the decorations and luxurious arrangements are
gone; the former are either destroyed, converted
into ornaments for modern churches, or preserved
in the public museums. As one walks amid these
deserted remains, a sense of solitude and
mournfulness
powerfully affects him even beneath the
cheerful
light of noon-day. The extensive site of these
baths realizes, in a measure, our ideas of the state of
elegant luxury to which the Romans had attained.
The Baptistry of St. Constantine, a small
octagonal
building, contains several pillars of red
porphyry
and two brazen gates, taken from these haths.
The summit of the Palatine Hill is, however,
occupied
with ruins still more remarkable, even
considered
as architectural vestiges. So complete is
the deformity and decay which time and violence
have worked upon that luxurious abode of royalty,
the Palace of the Csars, that no observation,
however
critical, can discover any evidence of former
splendour, except what is discoverable in the extent
and solidity of the broken and straggling walls.
These stand in heavy groups, or isolated and
towering
fragments, while about them the gay forms of
vegetable life flourish, with a fertility that seems to
mock the barrenness of the ruins which their green
and clustering beauty but imperfectly conceals. As
I wandered there, the mildness of the air was
wonderful
for the season, and the bright sun-light,
verdant
earth, and beautiful surrounding prospect, took
from the view the sadness usually observable in
scenes, the prominent features of which are
antiquated
.
Yet, though the sterner shades of the
picture
were thus mellowed, its solemn lesson was as
forcibly imparted.
Tully was not so eloquent as thou,
Thou nameless column with the buried base!
What are the laurels of the Csars' brow?
Crown me with ivy from his dwelling-place.
In the statue gallery of the Museum of the
Capitol
,
comparatively little is found to excite
admiration
in the mind of one familiar with the treasures
of the Vatican. The Dying Gladiator differed
essentially from the notion I had previously
entertained
respecting it. The chief, the particular
merit
of this celebrated statue seems to consist in its
admirable expression of
physical
suffering. The
position, in view of the wound, is so perfectly true
to nature (as described and illustrated by Dr. Bell),
[2]
[2]
Vide Bell's Philosophy of Expression.
that one cannot but study it with growing
gratification
.
But he must, I think, be very imaginatively
disposed to discover that look of mental anguish
and dying sentiment, which might be naturally
anticipated.
In the Borgehese Palace I paid frequent and
admiring
attention to the most interesting work it
containsRaphael's Deposition from the Cross.
The picture hall of the Palazzo Colonna must, when
illuminated, present one of the finest scenes of the
kind in Rome. After inspecting the views by
Claude, and several works by the old masters,
E 2
I became much interested in examining a beautiful
cabinet, the frontal exterior of which is very
ingeniously
carved in ivory. The middle pannel
represents
,
in exquisite basso relievo, the master-piece
painting of M. Angelo, and affords a much better
idea of the design of that work than a distant view
of the defaced original can give. At the old dreary
palace of the Barbarini, I paused long before two
famous original paintingsRaphael's Fornarina and
Guido's Portrait of Beatrice Cenci; the one from
the perfection displayed in its execution, the other
from the melancholy history of its subject,
[3]
[3]
I am cut off from the only world I know,
From life, and light, and love, in youth's sweet prime.
You do well telling me to trust in God,
I hope I do trust in him. In whom else
Can any trust? And yet my heart is cold.
Beatrice in Prison:Shelley's Tragedy of the Cenci
.
are
highly attractive.
The Churches of St John Lateran
In the vicinity are the Scala Sacra or Holy Stairs, said
to be the stairs of Pilate's Judgment Seat, which our Saviour
ascended. They are continually mounted by innumerable
devotees upon their knees.
and St. Maria
Maggiore are next to St. Peters in extent and
richness
.
Among the numerous temples of worship
delightful to frequent, is the Chiesa St. Maria degli
Angeli, a noble building in the form of the Greek
Cross, and rendered imposing by a grand dome and
extensive pavement; it contains a famous meridian
and two fine frescosSt. Peter performing a cure,
and the Baptism of Our Saviour. The celebrated
Sybils of Raphael are in the Church of St. Maria
della Pace, and the Christ of M. Angelo in that of
St. Maria sopra Minerva. There is, too, a small
church near the Forum, said to be the identical
prison
where St. Peter and St. Paul were confined.
When visiting this building, we descended a
considerable
flight of steps, and came to a gloomy
dungeon
,
the traditionary cell of the great apostles.
The very stone, fenced strongly with iron, to which
they were chained, is designated. While
endeavouring
to feel that this very vault had, indeed,
been the scene of suffering and prayer to the revered
martyrs, a severe task was imposed upon our
credulity
.
A small excavation in the wall above the
staircase, guarded like the relic below, we were
informed was occasioned by a blow which the
guard gave St. Peter as he descended, causing his
head to strike and miraculously shatter the stone.
In a neighbouring church, called Ara Cli, we
admired
an exquisite marble altar, said to have been
erected by Augustus.
CHURCH CEREMONIES.
A bright
Sabbath morning found me seated in the
little chapel of a monastery, the dark and riveted
walls of which denoted its antiquity. A few
individuals
were seated upon the wicker chairs around,
and between the lattice-work of the partition,
several
nuns might be seen quietly engaged in their
devotions. I had come thither to witness the
ceremony
by which two females entered upon their
noviciate. When the chapels on either side of the
lattice were well-nigh filled, and a priest, robed for
the occasion, had placed himself near the grate, an
elderly preacher approached, and seating himself,
addressed impassionately the kneeling females. His
discourse, couched in the symphonic accents of the
Italian, and delivered with singular energy, was not
without impressiveness. He painted in glowing
colours the temptations to which humanity is
exposed
upon the arena of the world, the moral safety
and satisfaction of religious seclusion, the beauty
and acceptableness in the sight of Heaven of the
consecration of the young and the warm-hearted
even such as they who knelt silently byto the
cause of Christ and the Church. The priest and
his assistants then chanted from the ritual for some
time, the silvery voices of the nuns blending
melodiously
with the choruses. At length the clear yet
hesitating voices of the noviciates might be heard as
they read their vows. Their interesting appearance
and the associations of the moment were not
inoperative
upon those of us to whom the scene was new;
there was a kind of sad and thrilling poetry in their
very tones.
The first Sunday in Advent is one of those days
when services are attended by the Pope in the
Sistine
Chapel. I willingly embraced the opportunity
to obtain a view of his Holiness. The
comparatively
small room, one of the halls of the Vatican,
was surrounded at an early hour by a large
concourse
of strangers. We passed through the whole
band of Swiss guards, drawn up in the colonnade.
These, although somewhat picturesque in their
appearance
,
always reminded me of the soldiers of the
opera-house or the stage, as the ruff they wear, and
something in their
tout ensemble
, seems more scenic
than actualmore designed for effect than action.
Upon entering, I looked intently upon a work of
art of which I had heard muchsaid to be, in fact,
the most meritorious and wonderful of paintings
the Last Judgment, by Michael Angelo, covering
the entire back wall of the chapel. With all my
gazing, however, I could but descry numerous and
apparently most muscular figures, in various
positions
,
the centre one in the attitude of command.
Subsequent inquiry and reading, in some degree,
explains
the disappointment caused by a first view of
this renowned production. Its chief merit consists
in the bold yet natural development of the forms,
and the mathematical precision of the execution. It
is, in a word, a grand study for the artist, and would
more immediately affect the merely curious, had
not time defaced, and did not a bad position obscure
its merits. The living pageant, however, soon
attracted attention. Many cardinals, bishops, and
other dignitaries, with their purple robes and ermine
decorations, occupied the innermost division. But
the Pope entering, riveted the eyes of most of the
audience. Nothing remarkable in his physiognomy
strikes the beholder, except an unusually prominent
nose. There was much apparent seriousness and
devotion evinced by this personage, and, indeed, by
the whole assembly; the chanting was solemn,
though not remarkable, and to one devotionally
disposed, the whole service was by no means void
of grateful influence.
MODERN ARTISTS.
At
the studio of Thorwaldsen there is much to
interest and gratify the visitor, whether the
intrinsic
and individual merit or the remarkable number
of his works be considered. The sunny face of the
shepherd boy, as he sits contemplatively with his
dog beside him, is truly inimitable; as are the Three
Graces, and Mercury in the act of taking advantage
of the sleep into which his music has lulled Argus.
Of all unclassical specimens of sculpture, the figure
of Lord Byron in a surtout and heavy shoes, with a
pencil in hand, with which he presses his lip
meditatively
,
here seen, is the most singular. The
birthplace
of this distinguished artist is not certainly
known. His earliest recollection of himself is that
of being on board a ship in the capacity of
cabin-boy
.
His origin is, however, undoubtedly
northern
,
and most probably Icelandic. After
surmounting
many difficulties, and attaining some rank in his
art, he visited Iceland. To this island, it is said, he
purposes bequeathing the greater part of his
collections
and property. Some of his greatest works
have been executed for the northern nations; and
collossal statues of our Saviour and the twelve
apostles
are now in progress for a church in Russia.
There is a work at present, only dead-coloured,
upon the easel of Overbeck, which, if completed in
the same noble manner that marks its conception,
will indeed prove glorious. It is called the
Christian
Parnassus, representing the fine arts in the
persons
of the great artists; and the groups ascending,
at length terminate in the figures of the Saviour and
Madonna. The likenesses, even in this early
sketch, are beautiful, and easily recognised; and the
gracefulness and vigour of delineation, with which
ninety-two forms are pictured on a comparatively
small canvass, indicates the genius of the artist. I
also remarked a very expressive and almost finished
painting, by the same handour Saviour at prayer
in the Garden. The impassioned, yet calm spirit of
earnest devotion, radiated from the wrapt
countenances
of the kneeling form, is finely contrasted
with the angry and expectant glances of the distant
crowd pressing on through the still obscurity, to
seize upon their victim.
GRAVES OF SHELLEY AND KEATS.
When
the literary pilgrim or susceptible observer
has become familiar with the aspect and suggestion
of Rome's antiquities and treasures of art, he has
yet another spot of hallowed earth to tread, another
locality to visit, as a shrine whose associations will
wreath his spirit as with incense, till it is penetrated
with sentiments of sympathy, sadness and love.
There may be here excited less of the sublime in
association, induced by the distance of the retrospect
with which the stricken and lone memorials of
extinct national greatness are pondered; but there
is room for more home-felt emotion, and occasion
for less grand and critical, but more touching
comment
,
than the antiquity of art and the ruins of
grandeur
can present. This spot is indeed neglected by
the antiquarian, and has been often passed by, with
the greatest indifference, by the merely fashionable
visitor; but who of us that loves the poetry of his
native tongue, and rare specimens of human
character
,
will not fondly and feelingly linger in the
sequestered English burying-ground, at the graves
of Shelley and Keats? He will there read the same
F
lesson, which more imposing monuments had
imparted
,
with deeper emphasis perhaps, but not in
tones of more melting penetration. The romantic
imagination, remarkable mental independence, and
extreme sensitiveness of the former of these poets,
combined, as they were, with high native and
acquired powers, and associated with a fate so deeply
melancholy, give a truly poetical colouring to our
recollections of him. Short and unappreciated was
the life of poor Keats, and his death a martyrdom.
The little left for friendship to record of him was
the beautiful brilliancy of young genius, its
primitive
hopefulness, the susceptibility which gave effect
to hireling opposition, and the gloomy flickering
and extinction of that vitality which alone
connected
an unsophisticated genius to an
unsympathizing
and uncongenial world. And what is this but
a common story in the chronicles of humanity?
Through the perspective and magnifying light of
time, it may possess more prominently mournful
features, but, wherever contemplated, it is essentially
the same; the conquest of gross power, grosser taste
and indiscriminate will over the casket of a gem,
the conventional form of an existence, the
temporary
habitation of a soul. Thus has it been of old,
and this is alike the history of an ancient martyr
and the victim of a modern sacrifice. The
intelligent
sentiment which impelled and sustained may
essentially differ, but the course, the consummation
is the same. The chief distinction between the suf
fering and final self-devotion of the unyielding in
faith, whose life was laid down in an ancient
amphitheatre
,
and that of Keats, is that the one
perished
,
according to the customs of the age, by the
hand of violence, and in the other the dormant fires
of disease were renewed, and the lingering progress
of decay speeded fatally onward. `Here lies one
whose name was writ in water;'an epitaph
dictated
,
like this, at the very gates of death, yet
bespeaks
the poet; and like every poetic sentiment is
replete with latent truth. That name was indeed
written in water, but the pencillings of a
progressive
and discerning spirit could have deepened the
inscription upon an adamantine surface of crystal.
But what these have failed to do, pity and
congeniality
are ever doing; and in innumerable hearts
the memory of Keats is cherished with a love
surpassing
even what the efforts of his maturer genius
could have inspired.
[4]
[4]
Hazlitt has justly observed that Keats's `ostensible
crime was, that he had been praised in the Examiner
newspaper
:
a greater and more unpardonable offence probably
was, that he was a true poet and had all the errors and
beauties
of a youthful genius to answer for. Mr. Gifford was as
insensible to the one as he was inexorable to the other.'
MODERN ROME.
Among
the odd traits observable in the Roman
population
,
is their aversion to two luxuries, especially
esteemed in more northern countries, and though
somewhat matters of taste, not altogether unallied to
a higher sentiment; these are flowers and fire. The
latter, during winter, is as truly physically requisite
as in colder climates; but less surprise should be
excited
by this antipathy among a people whose idea
of comfort is so widely different from our own, and
to whom this cheerful influence brings with it none
of the domestic associations which endear it to the
denizens of bleaker localities, and the possessors of a
better founded enthusiasm. The former distaste is
more remarkable, when we consider the proverbial
predilections of the Italians for the beautiful; and
yet it is to a surprising extent true, that most are
indifferent and many decidedly averse to flowers;
whereas, in Florence, we were ever beset with
flower-girls, and the Neapolitan peasants are seldom
seen without a nosegay. I have heard this
peculiarity
of the Romans ascribed to their very delicate
sense of smell, which renders even a mild perfume
quite overpowering; but it is difficult to admit a
reason which is so inconsistent with their habitual
toleration of far less genial odours, particularly the
unwholesome exhalations from the buried aqueducts
and infected
campagna
.
Although the period of my sojourn was
considered
,
in some respects, an uncommon season, yet
the excellence of the climate of Rome, according to
my best information and experience, has been sadly
exaggerated. During winter, a southerly wind, with
the usual accompaniment of rain or humidity, or a
dry piercing northerly blast, generally prevail. The
bright summer-like days, when the deep azure of
the sky and the balmy softness of the breezes recal
our cherished imaginings of Rome, are too
unfrequent
,
at least to please the invalid. Yet
one
of
those beautiful interludes in the capricious shiftings
of the weather is, if freely enjoyed, unspeakably
renovating. A promenade upon the Pincian hill or
in the Villa Borgehese, or an excursion to Tivoli, at
such a time, inclines one to forgive and forget all
the past waywardness of the elements. In summer,
that awful vapoury infectionthe
malaria
, and the
extreme heat are alike deleterious. It is very
confidently
asserted by individuals who judge from
experience
,
that a vast change has occurred in the climate
of Rome within the last thirty years, and that, even
within a less period, a marked difference, as regards
constancy and mildness, is observable.
The supremacy of the pope and his cardinals,
denominated
F 2
the sacred college, being all but absolute,
the risk incurred by such a sway renders the
government
extremely tenacious and jealous, so that of
all culprits of whom the law takes cognizance, none
are at once more frequently or less deservedly its
victims than political offenders. But the chief evil
immediately resulting from this condition of things,
consists in the concessions which the rulers make
to the ruled, in order to maintain their authority.
Many of these involve the total subversion of the
very principles which government is mainly
instituted
to maintain. Capital crime, for example, is
of all offences the least liable to retribution by the
operation of law in the Roman states. And such is
the sanguinary temperament of most of the people,
that any severe civil check upon it would inflame
opposition, and hence render their political yoke
more galling. Of the two evils, therefore, as might
be anticipated, government choose that which is
morally greatest, and politically least. Consequently,
the number of personal violences and murders is
almost incredible. An incarceration of a few
months for this highest of crimes, is often the sole
punishment; and even this is dispensed with, if the
offender can effect a pecuniary compromise with the
relations of the deceased. Within a short period,
the fourth murder, under the most atrocious
circumstances
,
alone sufficed to bring a noted culprit to the
gallows.
The present pope, it is believed, in executing
plans for the advancement of his own views, is
gradually
undermining one of the strong holds of his
power. The re-erection of St. Paul's church, in the
environs of Rome, in a costly style, and the creation
of five new cardinals, both measures in every respect
unnecessary, are among the extravagant plans with
which he is charged. The means of carrying on
these is obtained from extensive loans, for the
payment
of which his most valuable revenues are
pledged, and year after year, these are sacrificed to
his inability to meet the annual demand. I have
heard it confidently estimated, that, adopting the
past as a criterion, in the space of thirteen years,
the resources of the government will be absorbed;
and if the ability of the governed to support
taxation
,
at that juncture, is not better than at present,
there is no conceivable means of furnishing an
adequate
supply to sustain the papal credit.
[5]
[5]
Tosti, the present Treasurer General, is said to have
administered
the financial department so successfully as to have
met the annual exigencies, made up the deficit of the past
year, and retained a surplus.
But it is
highly probable that another and more rapid agency
than the slow depreciation of the treasury will, ere
then, have permanently altered the political
condition
not only of Rome, but of all Italy.
The degeneracy of modern Rome is a subject
ever forced upon the thoughtful resident, whenever
his mind is free to revert to the local and moral
circumstances
by which he is surrounded. And to
one who is in anywise familiar with her past
history
or susceptible to her present influences, it
becomes an almost absorbing theme. Vainly, at
times, do the glories of the Vatican allure him; their
delightful enchantments fade before a more
impressive
reality. He cannot rejoice unreservedly in the
splendours of human art, when humanity is a wreck
around him; he cannot indulge in stirring
retrospection
over the sculptured figure of an old Roman,
when it serves but to render more prominent the
moral deformity of his descendant. And if a gleam
of native enthusiasm excite him, caught from scenes
which the supremacy of character has hallowed, or
a sentiment of rich gratification steals over him from
the midst of material beauty, the idea which he most
loves to connect with thesethe idea of his race
brings with it an overpowering sadness.
Throughout
all that art or antiquity here unfolds, he feels as
if wandering in a beautiful garden, once blest with
a presence which shall know it no more. He feels,
in his inmost soul, that it was this non-existent
object
of his love which lent an hitherto unknown
interest to the marble and canvass, to mount and
river; and while ever and anon their silent beauty
affords a sad pleasure, they oftener serve but to
remind him of the grave which has closed over the
beloved of his memory.
Yet he gradually derives consolation, which
sometimes
brightens into happiness, in attaching himself
to such mementos; and when they recal most
strongly what has been, the thought of what may
yet be, brings home an exquisite and almost
forgotten
delight. While melancholy even imparts its
sad hue to the moral observer of Rome's relies and
ruins, something of hope, of instinctive anticipation,
bears out the mental gratification which ever flows
from them.
FLORENCE.
Girt by her theatre of hills, she reaps
Her corn and wine and oil, and Plenty leaps
To laughing life with her redundant horn;
Along the banks, where smiling Arno sweeps,
Was modern Luxury of Commerce born,
And buried Learning rose, redeemed to a new morn.
Search within,
Without; all is enchantment! 'Tis the Past
Contending with the Present; and in turn
Each has the mastery.
LOCALITIES.
The
prevalence of broad-sweeping vales, thickly
studded with olive trees, and relieved by a
background
of snow-covered mountains, uniquely
embosoming
a picturesque city, through the midst of
which a river courses, spanned by several finely
arched bridgesthese are local circumstances which
clearly assure us that we are in the delightful
capital
of the garden of Italy, as Tuscany is
appropriately
called. A merely conventional view of
Florence
inspired me with a strong predilection for it
as a residence. It possesses that medium character
as regards extent, population, and activity, which is
essential to the comfort of those who would find in
their place of abode a moderate degree of liveliness
combined with something of quietude and beauty.
Its compactness and broadly-paved streets, and the
general magnitude and antique cast of its buildings,
are features which almost immediately prepossess
the visitor.
One cannot wander long in Florence without
coming out upon the Piazza Grand Duca. This
square seems to possess something of the local
interest
of the Edinburgh grass-market, as described by
Sir Walter Scott; not that peculiar events transpire
there, but the place is a kind of central resort, the
post office and custom house being there situated,
and that curious specimen of Tuscan architecture
called the Palazzo Vecchio. There, too, stand the
colossal and time-hallowed figures, sculptured by
Buonarotti; seen at night how mystic their snowy
distinctness! The illuminated figures upon the old
tower designate, at that season, the hour, and a
solitary
sentinel standing in the shade of the buildings,
with the equestrian statue of Cosmo in the centre,
complete the romanticity of the scene. In the
daytime
a far more bustling appearance is presented
groups awaiting the sorting of the mails, venders
crying at their scattered booths, and, most unique of
all, a quack mounted upon his
cleche
, eulogizing his
nostrums most eloquently.
G
The view from the Boboli gardens attached to
the ducal palace, is thus graphically described by a
celebrated English poet:
`You see below Florence, a smokeless city, with
its domes and spires occupying the vale, and beyond,
to the right, the Apennines, whose base extends
even to the walls, and whose summits are intersected
by ashen-coloured clouds. The green valleys of
these mountains, which gently unfold themselves
upon the plains, and the intervening hills, covered
with vineyards and olive plantations, are occupied
by the villas, which are, as it were, another citya
Babylon of palaces and gardens. In the midst of
the picture rolls the Arno, through woods bounded
by aerial snowy summits of the Apennines. On the
right, a magnificent buttress of lofty craggy hills,
overgrown with wilderness, juts out into many
shapes over a lonely valley, and approaches the
walls of the city.
`Cascini and other villages occupy the pinnacles
and abutments of these hills, over which is seen, at
intervals, the ethereal mountain line, hoary with
snow and intersected by clouds. The valley below
is covered with cypress groves, whose obeliskine
forms of intense green pierce the gray shadow of
the wintry hills that overhang them. The
cypresses
,
too, of the garden, form a magnificent
foreground
of accumulated verdure: pyramids of dark
green shining cones, rising out of a mass, between
which are cut, like caverns, recesses conducting into
walks.'
At no great distance we find the Museum of
Natural
History, the anatomical preparations of which
are probably unsurpassed for their complete and
scientific exhibition of the several parts and
processes
of the human system. Here the body seems
literally laid open, its nerves, glands and muscles
represented in their natural positions, relations, hues
and functions; and all with a regularity of
arrangement
,
and displaying a perfection in the execution
truly admirable. Means of studying nature, in so
important a department, more comprehensive, and
withal commodious, can scarcely be imagined.
Admiration
of the skill of the artist and an agitating
sense of the wonderful delicacy and mysterious
science involved in our physical being alternately
occupy the beholder.
The Mausoleum and Chapel Tomb of the Medici
are remarkable objects of attention. The latter is
hallowed by the immortal work of M. Angelo,
which it contains; and the former is yet in the
progress
of construction, and although very rich in
marbles and precious stones, possesses too sombre a
hue, with its present incumbrances, to show these to
much advantage.
ART AND ARTISTS.
Within
the palace is a magnificent range of
apartments
appropriated to the fine arts, through which
we are privileged, by the liberal courtesy so striking
to the stranger in Tuscany, unreservedly to wander.
They are adorned above with the most splendid
frescos illustrative of the Iliad, beneath by
brilliantly
polished floors, while around, in gorgeous
profusion, are various and admired paintings. The
chief distinction of this collection seems to consist
in the remarkable paucity of ordinary works amid
such a multitude. There are few which indicate
vast genius or inspire overpowering sentiments, but
many which, from their intrinsic beauty or
excellence
of execution, form delightful sources of
contemplative
pleasure.
But the grand object which lends a most
attractive
charm to this city, is its far-famed gallery of art,
containing, besides innumerable paintings, many
original works of ancient sculpture. Day after day
may the resident here frequent this elegant and
instructive resort, until it becomes to him a familiar
retreat, where much of his daily happiness is
experienced
,
and many of his best thoughts suggested.
Here, were this my home, would many of my best
friends be; for who can fail to have his favourite
paintings, as well as his much-loved walks or most
admired authors? And who that values the objects
and agencies around him in proportion to their
improving
influences can withstand the sentiment of
sympathy inspired by the long study and nurtured
love of art's happiest products? How many
delightful
hours may one pass in that little
sanctum
of artthe Tribune, gazing upon its presiding
goddess
,
and basking in the radiated expression of its
pictured glories! Often, while seated in the circular
chair opposite the celebrated statue of the
Knife-grinder
,
I could not but reflect upon the position as
superior to any which mere wealth or station could
boast. For if the end chiefly attainable from both
these is enjoyment, assuredly the rich little
apartment
I temporarily occupied, evolves from its
beautiful
treasures sufficient pleasurable inspiration to
delight every worthy capacity of happiness, such as
is derivable from outward objects. Specification
and especial comment in regard to the paintings in
the Gallery and Palace of Florence becomes less
and less practicable as the sojourner repeats and
lengthens his visits. The works of Raphael, Titian,
Morillo, and Salvator, distinctive as they are,
become
to the studious observer more and more
instinct with an inspiration over which he loves to
ponder, but which seldom `wreaks itself upon
expression
.'
Standing amid the renowned sculptured group of
G 2
Niobe and her children, I could indeed discover
maternal sadness in the fixed countenance of the
former: yet at the first view, it seemed wanting in
that excited, agonized grief, which the occasion
would naturally induce. Perhaps, however, the
expression
more justly is that of placid and utterly
despairing sorrow. The matronly form, the
manner
in which the mother's arm protects her clinging
babe, the fine natural positions of the children
none can behold without admiration; nor, I think,
without wishing that the whole group was better
disposed for exhibiting the scene so vaguely
indicated
by the severed and regularly placed figures.
At the extremity of the gallery are two statues
by DonatelloJohn the Baptist in the Wilderness,
and David. In viewing the former, one must admit
its excellence as an artificial representation of an
attenuated human form; but few can restrain a
feeling
of impatience in regarding it as the image it is
designed to exhibit. In the successful attempt to
delineate a victim of famine, all trace of devotion
and benignity is lost. In this, as in other instances,
the subject of regret is that the artist had not been
satisfied with executing a fine imitation of nature,
instead of aiming, at the same time, at representing
a great character. Michael Angelo's Christ would
not so often disappoint, were it known by another
name. It is the nature of man to associate with
names corresponding ideas; and he mars not a little
the completeness of his fame who is prone to
connect
with the emanations of his genius or industry,
the added attraction of a title which is, in itself,
calculated
to excite great expectations. That title will
anticipate the work itself in reputation; and hence
the notions of the multitude will be
proportionably
raised. It is highly interesting to peruse the
various, and for the most part, strongly marked
countenances in the Portrait Gallery. These
likenesses
comprise authentic delineations of the
master-painters
.
Those of Titian, Vandyke, and Perugini
particularly arrested my attention.
In the Corsini Palace, several sketches by
Salvator
a
powerful modern work, the Death of Priam
a very pretty one, the Corsini Childrentwo Dutch
portraits, finished up with a truly dreadful fidelity
to natureCarlo Dolci's Poesia, and a drawing by
Raphael, are the most interesting works in the
extensive
collection. Of late productions of art at
present to be seen in this city, few interested me
more than those of Bartolini, the most celebrated,
and, in some respects, the best of modern sculptors.
The statue of Charity, with an infant asleep in her
arms, and a boy receiving instruction at her feet,
and a beautiful Priestess of Bacchus, still in the
hands of the artist, most delighted me. I viewed,
also, with lively pleasure, a picture just completed
by a young Florentinethe miracle of a mule
refusing her proffered food and falling upon her
knees at the sight of St. Anthony bearing the host.
Whatever may be thought of the subject, the
execution
is wonderful. The countenance of the covered
heretic, for whose good the miracle is supposed to
have been performed, expressing astonishment and
conviction, the calm self-possessed air of the saint,
with the reverence and still devotion beaming from
the attentive features of the surrounding crowdall
this is most feelingly conceived and depicted. The
artist is but twenty years of age, one of a gifted
family.
In relation to contemporary artists, and to the
most beautiful of the arts, it is however happily
permitted
to the American visitor at Florence, to
mingle
with the gratifications of the present and the
hopes of the future, the glow of patriotic pride and
pleasure. When from the halls sacred to the
trophies
of ancient art, he turns to regard the efforts
now making to renew the days of her glory, there
is one spot to which he will fondly and frequently
revert, where an assiduous and gifted votary
brightens
the days of his exile with the loved labours of
the chisel. Whether moulding infant forms to
speak to us of innocence and heaven, tracing the
delicate lines of a marble-embodied portraiture, or
turning to the sublime enterprise of fashioning the
august image of the Father of his Country for the
Capitol of the rotunda, the artist manifests the
conceptive
and progressive energy of true genius. It
is the Studio of Greenough.
A SPRING EXCURSION.
As
the season of mildness and salubrity unfolds
with the rapidity and luxuriance peculiar to southern
Europe, the pleasures of pedestrianism and
excursions
into the vicinity are augmented. To gain the
summit of Fiesole, the place of Cataline's
encampment
,
and gaze from off the beautiful and
cypress-decked
esplanade in front of the old monastery there
situated, upon the city beneath, and the snowy
heights in the distance, or to thread the sunny path
that skirts the river, becomes daily more delightful.
The song of birds in the groves, the rustling of the
bright lizards among the dead leaves, and the hum
of insects in the warm air are too spring-like not to
excite, with their genial vivacity, the contemplative
spirit. On these occasions the converse of
friendship
would frequently and almost spontaneously die
away before the subtle influence of awakening and
teeming nature. Ever and anon we involuntarily
paused to admire the beauty around. The river
presenting an increased body of water, rapidly
purling
along its wayward course; the opposite bank
displaying its numerous and various trees, now
becoming more deeply umbrageous and verdant,
while, upon each hand, that glorious object, the
hoary mountain ranges, reflecting the scattered
sunlight
,
and contrasting with the indented slopes,
combined
to form a landscape of peculiar cheerfulness
and beauty.
It was on a day like this that I extended my
acquaintance with the environs of the city, much
beyond the limits to which previous excursions had
carried me. After six miles of riding we reached
Pratolino, a villa of the Grand Duke, and
perambulated
its park-like grounds, the wooded parts of
which forcibly reminded me of Mount Auburn.
Here we viewed a most colossal statue, composed of
brick, plaster-work and stone, which, from its awful
size and muscular development, presents a mammoth
rather than a truly sublime object. The fountain
designed to flow over it was quite dry. The figure
is human and in a sitting posture. We went
through the ceremony of ascending and entering
the enormous head of this monstrous result of the
labours of Giovanni di Bologna. The old
lacquey
de place
who accompanied us promised to point out
his country house on the road; and when we were
passing a broad plain having a large cross in the
centre, declared that to be the `home in the country'
to which he confidently expected to retire. It was
the public burying-ground. Thus spoke he of the
last resting place of his body, and in his habit and
easy manner of sustaining the mortal coil, I
recognized
one of those peculiar philosophers, of whom
Goldsmith so often and charmingly speaks.
CARNIVAL.
The
last week of Carnival, although unmarked by
the extravagant festivities which attract the stranger
multitude at the seat of Catholicism, is yet
sufficiently
prolific of amusement. The
Lung' Arno
,
as the street bordering the river is called, is
thronged
,
and the occasional appearance of a party of
maskers, and especially that of a gilded and painted
vehicle, filled with a band of choristers dressed in
the Chinese fashion, evidences a gala time. The
Grand Duke's equipage, consisting of several
carriages
drawn by four horses richly caparisoned, with
gaudy outriders, adds to the passing show. A
Festa
di Ballo
is the favourite evening diversion. The
extensive floor of one of the large theatres is
covered
with people of various orders, the number of
maskers being generally small in proportion to the
whole assembly. Most of the females wear large
black silk dominos and half masks. A few gay and
comical disguises appear amid the throng; and
most of the time three or four sets of waltzers are
footing it away in various parts of the building.
There is far less of genuine humour than I had
looked for, and a small display of taste in the
costumes
.
Most of the maskers, in their silent glidings
to and fro, seemed convened rather for intrigue than
mere pastime. Indeed the practice, when not
evidently
made use of as a source of mirth, or
successful
in producing that effect, is too intrinsically
sinister
to please those unaccustomed to it. I can readily
imagine a masquerade in France as a very gay,
amusing, and perhaps pleasing spectacle; but if this
be a specimen of this form of diversion in Italy, I
can only say that it possesses, in my view, little
comparative attraction. The Chiesa di St. Giovanni
is splendidly arrayed in tapestry and brilliantly
illuminated
.
The inspiring solos and choruses, with
the deep responses of the assembled multitude, and
the grand instrumental harmony, formed a scene
more impressive and interesting than the combined
pleasures of the Carnival.
Among the by-way mirth observable at this
mirthful
season, one instance struck me as quite unique. A
man wearing a military chapeau, stood upon an
inverted
basket, at a corner, with an outstretched arm and
a fixed eye, immovable as a statue. The joke
consisted
in his perfect immobility amid the jeers and
questionings of an eager group. In the midst of a
warm debate, whether the figure was artificial or
human, the support was removed from beneath his
feet, and the hero of the scene joined in the
merriment
,
the source of which was so essentially the
product of Florentine wit. A few days after I saw
a multitude convened to witness a sadder but equally
characteristic spectacle. In front of the singular old
prison of Florence, three criminals were exposed,
having upon their breasts large placards indicating
their names, age and crimes. They had been
condemned
to the galleys for three years, and the bell
had assembled a curious crowd to gaze upon their
wretchedness, and witness their transportation.
H
CEREMONIES.
On
a fine afternoon we visited Prato, a
manufacturing
town ten miles distant, for the purpose of
witnessing
a religious procession, which occurs there
once in three years, and is deemed one of the most
imposing in Italy. Having passed two or three
hours in roaming about the streets, amid the dense
crowds assembled to behold the ceremonial, about
dusk we took the station previously obtained for us,
being one compartment of the rough and somewhat
elevated galleries which lined the way. The houses
were illuminated, and the strong light falling upon
two tiers of spectators arranged on either side, gave
to the scene a remarkable effect. First in the
procession
(designed in observance of the death of our
Saviour) came a large cavalcade, habited as the
ancient
Roman soldiers, the leaders wearing rich
mantles
,
and dark-plumed helmets; then a considerable
body of infantry; then a band of musicians clad in
black. After these appeared an immense number
of laymen bearing torches, and followed by boys,
priests and marshals; and then were borne,
successively
,
all the emblems of our Saviour's sufferings,
and, inscribed upon banners, his words during the
crucifixion; after all, preceded by a large choir of
priests, and surrounded by torch-bearers, appeared
the image of the dead Jesus, over which was carried
a large black canopy; then came the Madonna,
more music, another cavalcade of soldiery, and files
of citizens closed the procession. As this was the
first ceremonial of the kind I had seen, my interest
was considerably excited. It certainly was well
calculated to induce its destined influence. The
combined effect of such a solemn moving pageant,
and the gazing multitude, revealed to the sight by
the flickering glare of an hundred torches; the
profound
stillness which reigned, broken only by an
occasional murmur, the deep tones of the chanters,
or the measured strains of the instruments; the view,
under such circumstances, of the symbols of the
sufferings
of Him who, on that day, centuries past, was
borne mournfully and quietly to the sepulchreall
came most touchingly and with an awful and solemn
distinctness upon the mind.
Among the curious ceremonies of the holy week,
observed in Florence, is that called the Columbina.
At mid-day, the figure of a small dove is made, by
fire-works, to glide rapidly along a large wire from
the main altar of the Cathedral, through the
principal
entrance to the other side of the street, where it
comes in contact with a magazine of squibs lodged
in a massive carved block or pillar, thence
producing
gradual but continued explosions. This
phenomenon
,
although its effect is unaided by the darkness
of night, is eagerly viewed by an immense populace
filling the large square and adjacent balconies and
windows. What its religious signification is, I
cannot
precisely determine. The first fire is said to be
communicated from a holy flint,
i. e.
a small fragment
of the tomb of Christ; and the
contardini
attach
great importance to the manner in which the dove
executes her mission, not indeed a very peaceful
one. Should her passage be uninterrupted, and the
desired effect be produced, a favourable season for
the crops is inferred; if, on the other hand,
mismanagement
causes a failure, the contrary event is sadly
presaged. On this occasion the whole affair went off
well. It was regarded with much apparent interest
an interest, indeed, which nothing but the
character
of the people and the force of popular
superstitions
can explain.
NORMA.
The
opera of Norma is rife with the beautiful
music of Bellini, and the graceful poetry of Felice
Romano. The first representation here was
attended
by an immense assemblage, and listened to with
singular attention, from the fact, that during the last
autumn it was performed on the same stage, with a
German lady as
prima donna
, with what was
believed
to be an unequalled degree of success.
The plot of this opera represents the Druids in
Gaul, whose orgies are urged to the downfall of the
Romans, who, under a proconsul, are occupying this
ancient seat of their rites, and is said to have a
hidden
meaning, and to be allegorically significant of
the abuses of monastic institutions and the downfall
of the church; for which reason it was prohibited in
Rome under its original name, and before being
presented
there received essential modifications.
Norma
is high priestess, her father high priest, and
Adalgisa a young
ministra
in the temple. The
young Roman officer woos and wins Norma, and
afterwards is in love with Adalgisa. At length,
being taken in the very act of spying upon the
Druidical
H 2
rights, he is condemned to death; when
Norma
declares her apostacy, and glories to die upon the
same pile with her faithless but repentant lover.
This outline is most boldly sketched and
interestingly
filled up in the opera. The moving scenes are
those in which the infidelity of the proconsul is
discovered
,
where Norma makes a vain attempt to kill
her offspring; her interview with Adalgisa, the last
with Pollione, and that in which she implores her
father's forgiveness, and commits her children to his
care. The choruses are remarkably fine, and the
dresses, particularly of the females, quite
picturesque
.
In Norma's first ministration at the altar,
there is a hymn addressed to the moon, the most
touching piece of vocalism I have heard.
Casta Diva, che inargenti
Queste sacre antiche piante
,
A noi volgi il bel sembiante
Senza nube e senza vel
.
Tempra tu de' cori ardenti
,
Tempra ancor lo zelo audace
,
Spargi in terra quella pace
Che regnar tu fai nel ciel
.
A noi volgi il bel sembiante
Senza nube e senza vel
.
For pathos, vigour of acting, and strong moral
expression, the consummation of the plot in this
opera, as developed by vocal and dramatic talents of
a high order, is unsurpassed. When the young and
gallantly arrayed Roman is brought before the
Druidical
assembly, to answer to the charge of
haunting
their sacred groves, he sees Norma for the first
time since, on the detection of his estrangement, she
overwhelmed him with indignant reproaches. And
now when the avenging steel is raised to destroy
him, she solicits her unsuspecting parent to allow
her a private interview with the culprit, as it were
to search into the motives of his sacrilege. The
brilliant temple is deserted by all but the proconsul
and her he has injured. He quailed not before the
angry multitude, nor at the threatening weapon, but
the eloquent eye of Norma thrills him with awe. I
can scarcely imagine a more commanding dramatic
representation of woman's dignity and power under
the sense of injury, than is displayed in the
majestic
mien and sternly beaming countenance of
Norma
,
as with the oak-leaf garland upon her head, her
long dark hair falling over white habiliments, and
her symmetrical arms quite bare and braceleted with
gold, she pauses before the awe-struck Roman, and
gazing as if to read his soul and torture with the
gazebreaks the spell of a long and solemn silence
with the deeply chanted words:
In mia mano alfin tu sei
.
In the duet between Norma and Adalgisa, where
they mingle their saddened spirits and mourn
together
the
one for love unreturned, the other for
love to be renounced, every note of the gamut is
run up with a precision and melody truly astonish
ing. And the last duet between the former and
Pollione, when, by her voluntary self-sacrifice, the
greatness of her character is revealed to him, and
his affection is renewed only to cheer her dreadful
doom, is melting beyond description.
Nor
.
Qual cor tradisti, qual cor perdesti
Quest' ora orrenda ti manifesti
.
Da te fuggire tentasti invano
;
Crudel Romano tu sei con me
.
Un nume, un fato di te pi forte
Ci vuole uniti in vita e in morte
.
Sul rogo istesso che mi divora
,
Sotterra ancora sar con te
.
Pol
.
Ah! troppo tardi t'ho conosciuta
,...
Sublime donna, io t'ho perduta
....
Col mio rimorso  amor rinato
,
Pi disperato, furente egli
.
Moriamo insieme, ah! s, moriamo
;
L'estremo accento sar ch' io t' amo
,
Ma tu morendo non m' abborrire
,
Pria di morire perdona a me
.
In a word, I have seen no opera which combines
so much that is interesting and frequently sublime,
and wonder not that in a country so imaginative
and musical as this, and with such unrivalled
performers
,
it should be so universally popular. In
this, the city of its origin, the Italian opera seems to
exist in singular perfection, and its votaries to
evince a peculiar and discriminating enthusiasm.
[6]
[6]
Politiano is said to have originated the Italian opera in
his `Orfeo.'
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.
It
is not the intensity, but the peculiar chilliness of
the mountain wind which renders winter
formidable
here. The difference of temperature, at that
season, between the open country and in the full
influence of the sun, and that of the narrow streets,
is almost incredible. Hence the period of nature's
renovation is not less welcome than in colder climes.
And when the ceremonies of the holy week were
over, and the season, deemed the finest in Florence,
at length palpably evinced itself, the mass of
travellers
returned thither on their way northward.
There is something to me singularly inconsistent in
this mechanical driving way of seeing Italy. Of all
countries it requires especial study, and calm
habitual
attention to develope its resources. There is,
indeed, a kind of pleasure, to one in good health
and easily amused, in flying from place to place,
constantly seeking new objects and exhausting none.
But this is surely a mere negative enjoyment. The
individual
thus
intent upon self-gratification, may
find it elsewhere, and by other means. The
peculiar
satisfaction derivable in this land, to one of us
denizens of the new, the active, the bustling world,
is found in its quiet air, its contemplative spirit,
in the imaginative character of the amusements,
in the calm impulse by which, under such
circumstances
,
the current of existence is urged along.
The pervading musical spirit of the Florentines
seemed to break out anew as the genial season
advanced
,
and no time were the opera airs chanted by
persons of almost every class as they walk the
streets at night, heard more frequently.
The Florentines, and indeed the Tuscans, generally
are, as far as my observation extended, the happiest
Italians: more liberally governed they certainly are.
But the number of paupers and improvidents, even
here, must strike an American visitor; and blindness
or affections of the eyes are remarkably common.
Yet the peculiar toll of the bell which calls out the
Misericordia
is comparatively seldom heard. This
is an ancient institution, the members of which, at a
certain summons, array themselves in sackcloth
dominos, and hasten to execute whatever charitable
office the occasion demands. The brethren are
buried
by the society, whose dark forms, bearing a
body, sometimes glide fearfully upon the sight, their
torches flickering in the noon-day light, and their
measured tread echoing among the busy streets
quite solemnly.
Although my early and favourable impressions of
this city were confirmed, yet, in one respect, many
are liable to disappointment. With the imaginative
expectancy natural to the inexperienced, we may
have pictured an inland Italian city as a quiet spot,
whose very air is redolent with the mellowness of
age, and whose every object, from the lowly
dwelling
to the magnificent church, is rich in the interest
of antiquity. Here, on the contrary, there is much
which resembles what may be called the natural
language of a modern metropolis. The constant cry
of the venders, the hurrying to and fro of busy feet,
the restlessness of trade, and the gaudy bustle of
pleasureall are here, and they break in too rudely
upon the quiet beauty of the scene, antiquated as
are some of its features, to permit of more than the
occasional indulgence of that romantic illusion with
which we are fain to tint the sterner outlines of
reality. Yet there are times and aspects which
carry the meditative into the region where they
most delight to expatiatethe region of imaginative
thought. The pleasure of a morning's lounge in
the gallery of the Pitti, or the Tribune, of a
retrospective
hour in the holy precincts of St. Croce,
above the `dust which makes them holier,' of a
sunset
view from the beautiful bridge of Santa Trinita,
of an evening's walk along the Arno, of listening
and gazing within the chaste walls of the Pergola
all this would seem tame in description, but in
reality
it is entrancing. It is, too, morally exciting,
when the moon is careering high in the heavens, to
walk around the spacious square of the Duomo, and
look up at the Cathedral and beautiful greco-arabic
campanile
beside it, illuminated by a light so in
unison with their own dusky, yet rich hues, so
revealing to the mammoth proportions of the one,
and the towering but simple elegance of the other.
When the wide space around reflects no sound but
the faint echo of a solitary pedestrian, standing in
full view of such a grand and time-hallowed result
of human art, and remembering how oft the same
lonely orb has bathed in silver radiance the old
dome and pinnaclesmore faithful in the still
tenderness
of her nightly greetings than the evanescent
and inconstant sentiment of man, the idea of Italy
and her intellectual nobleness comes home like a
realized dream to the heart.
I
NAPLES.
Naples! thou Heart of men which ever pantest
Naked beneath the lidless eye of heaven!
Elysian City, which to calm enchantest
The mutinous air and sea! they round thee, even
As sleep round Love, are driven!
I stood within the city disinterr'd;
And heard the autumnal leaves, like light foot-falls
Of spirits passing through the streets; and heard
The mountain's slumbering voice at intervals
Thrill through those roofless halls.
POZZUOLI.
The
cleche
which I took in the suburbs, soon
brought me in front of the high mound denominated
Virgil's tomb; as my immediate arrangements
precluded
a minute inspection, I could only sigh at the
discrepancy between the ideal and actual spot. Such
en passant
reflections were soon dissipated by the
curious and antiquated scene in which I almost
immediately
found myself. This was no other than
the Grotto of Posilipo, a cavern road, excavated so
long ago that the date of the work is lost, through
the high mount which divides Naples from Pozzuoli.
I rode along this remarkable highway for the
distance
of half a mile. Its obscurity is only rendered
more mysterious by the dim light of the lamps
occasionally
suspended upon the sides, and the broad
glare of day seen at either end, through the dark
perspective.
A few moments' ride, after emerging, brought me
upon the sea-side, along which the remainder of my
course lay. Upon a jutting point appeared Pozzuoli,
an ancient town, while the hill-side, skirting my
road on the right, displayed stratas of lava. Having
discharged my conveyance, I proceeded to the old
mole, considerable remnants of which still exist, and
then hastened to the ruins of the temple of Jupiter
Serapis. Three very lofty columns alone remain
standing, but several large fragments lie scattered
around. The remaining exterior walls clearly
indicate
the original dimensions and shape of the temple,
which was evidently on the highest scale of
magnificence
.
Indeed, no remain of this class presented
to me such a literal ruin as this. More than a foot
of water covers the extensive marble floor, which
slimy weeds completely hide. A ring and several
broken vessels are discoverable, denoting the
sacrifices
of which it has been the scene. One of the
columnar fragments is eaten, in a most remarkable
manner, by a species of insectthe incisions being
as large as an augur-hole. Near the ruins are
remains
of sulphur, vapour and mineral baths.
My attention was drawn to the amphitheatre,
a ruin in excellent preservation. I was able to
I 2
walk, for a long space, between the two walls, within
which are the caves for wild beasts, and exteriorly
the shape is discernible. The arena is covered with
trees; they were destitute of verdure, and the
intervening
space, thickly sown with grain, the green
shoots of which had already put forth from a soil
doubtless fertilized with human blood, and
presenting
to the casual spectator any thing rather than a
spot where cruelty had often triumphed, and suffering
been Romanly endured. The solfatura, or
manufacture
of sulphur and alum, from the native
material
,
furnished yet another object in the vicinity.
The process, from the absence of any considerable
apparatus, is apparently very simple; probably little
more than the melting and straining of the original
substances, of which the surrounding hills are in a
great measure composed. Where large excavations
have been made, boiling springs have issued, the
odour of which is tremendous. In many places the
ground beneath seemed hollow, and I fancied I
heard volcanic rumblings.
Resuming my walk, I passed over the
mountainside
,
where there is a very rough though somewhat
worn path. The sun had just passed his meridian,
and the heat and exercise soon produced
considerable
fatigue, so that I was glad to dine on the
campagna
bread and wine, in the cottage of a
contardini
.
Having reached the Lake d'Agnano, and
admired its placid beauty, I found it impossible to
enter the
grotto del cane
, or see the experiment
from which it derives its name, as the
custode
, like
most of his neighbours, had gone to enjoy the festa
within the city. But I had seen enough of nature's
gaseous operations for one day, and could too easily
imagine this, to regret the accident of not
witnessing
it.
About an hour's rapid walking brought me once
more to the grotto wood, through which I passed,
and was again in Naples. Upon reaching the
chiaja
, the placid waters of the broad bay, the red
streak upon Vesuvius, the busy, mingled and noisy
crowdall accorded with what I had read, and
almost
with what I had imagined of the city. Upon
the square in front of the royal palace, the church of
St. Francisco appeared, studded with small lights
upon the top of the corridors, domes and cross. In
a few moments, at a signal fired from below, far
brighter and larger flames flashed up in the
intervening
spaces, exhibiting the statues in broad relief,
and the square filled with an admiring populace.
The Toledo, too, was crowded, and every house
illuminated
;it
was the evening of the king's
birthday
,
and his seemingly happy subjects, of every
rank, class and calling, were abroad and active.
POMPEII.
The
weather being very unpromising on the
succeeding
morning, I had determined to pass it
within the city as profitably as might be, and having
visited several churches, and taken a glimpse of the
large dull chambers of the court of justice, I
entered
the celebrated museum, which contains, among
sundry other curiosities, the disinterred relics of
another
age and a by-gone peoplethe various articles
rescued from Herculaneum and Pompeii. After
inspecting
the strange and frequently beautiful frescos,
I entered the gallery of sculpture, and viewed the
innumerable busts of heroic, political and
philosophical
characters there collectedthe statues of
emperors
,
of heathen divinities, of fabulous beings, of
men venerated for ages for their virtues or wisdom,
or `damned to fame' for their licentious use of
temporary
power. I found myself somewhat familiar
with the forms and features of these personages,
having become partially acquainted therewith during
my visit to the other galleries of Italy. I was
particularly
delighted with a statue of Aristidesthe
position of which seems truly inimitable; it breathes
the very spirit of that dignity which is founded
solely upon moral pre-eminence. I gazed with
interest
upon the trophies from Egypt, the
remarkable
idols, the well preserved mummies, the laboured
hieroglyphics; and with wonder upon the bronzes
preserved, it is difficult to tell how, from the effect
of a heat apparently intense enough to melt them
into their original crude forms. Deeming this view
of the lower halls sufficient for one day, and finding
that the threatened sirocco was destined to be less
formidable than I imagined, I left Naples, and
in about two hours was walking beneath the half
obscure sky of a mild afternoon, through a city
whose inhabitants vanished from the earth like a
mist, and whose glory, if glory consists in fame,
results
,
not like that of other places, from the
hallowing
actions of mankind, but from the destructive
operations of natureI was in Pompeii. With
what feelings of curiosity and awe did I tread upon
the very pavement where, two thousand years ago,
hundreds of my fellow beings moved to and fro,
with all the carelessness, the eagerness of pursuit,
the selfishness of purpose, which another race so
long trod above their entombed habitations! Stript
as Pompeii is of those objects which rendered it,
when first discovered, the greatest of wonders, the
very sight of houses, shops, theatres and temples,
broken and imperfect as they are, where ages ago
this wonderful phenomena of human existence was
carried on, and its several elements sustained, even
as at present: this is most wonderful, most exciting.
We seem to know, as never before, that human
nature
has ever been the samethe same in its wants,
if not the same in its resources. There are those
who can witness the passing away of one of the
myriads of men which people the earth, or stand
among the congregated tombs of their kind, and yet
feel no light shed upon the darkness of their
scepticism
,
and doubt a better destiny for man, even over
the gloomy consummation of his physical existence.
But who can enter the living tomb of a civilized
people, which has appeared, almost magically,
after the lapse of centuries, and not yield, without
resistance, to its most eloquent teachings? Viewing
the identical means of life, bodily and mental, that
were wrought by an extinct race for the gratification
of their native propensities, and computing the
degree
of thought, the exercise of sentiment here
unfolded
,
can any one believe that the fiery masses
which failed to destroy these conventional means,
palsied in oblivion the energies that created them?
Pompeii, its history, the particulars of its
disinterment
,
the objects it presents, are familiar to the
mind of almost every one. We can scarcely hope,
in its present state, to do more than realize our
abstract
ideas concerning it. One impression the
observant
visiter of this day cannot but carry away,
and that is, that its yet undiscovered treasures will
exceed all that the past has unfolded.
VESUVIUS.
Under
favourable auspices I commenced moving,
upon a donkey, from the village of Resina towards
Vesuvius, through a kind of lane choked up with
earth and stones. Two hours of slow riding brought
me to the first elevation, where stands a cottage,
called the Hermitage, inhabited by an old monk,
and affording shelter to the guards upon the
mountain
.
My course became then confined to a
mule-path
,
so much impeded by the heavy masses of lava,
that none but the experienced animal I bestrode
could have made a way along its rough and broken
surface. I was soon upon a vast plain of crude
black lava, thrown into a thousand accidental forms,
and presenting a wide scene of utter desolation. At
the foot of Vesuvius, properly so called, I left the
animal, and commenced climbing the steep ascent.
Being obliged to tread solely upon the craggy
projections
or small fragments of the lava, and
sometimes
upon ashes only, the process proved
exceedingly
fatiguing. Although in part sustained by the
guide by means of the horse's bridle, I was
several
times obliged to sit down upon some projecting
point and collect breath for a fresh effort.
Proceeding
thus, I at length reached the comparatively
level space immediately below the uppermost
elevation
.
Here, as I advanced towards the new crater,
the crackling of the porous masses, and the
bellowing
of the smoke-pouring summit, were sufficiently
appalling. Occasionally the boiling sulphur was
seen oozing from some little crevice, and the surface
which sustained my wayward footsteps, seemed
about to fall beneath them.
I approached near enough to the new crater to
inhale the sulphurous exhalations and become
sensible
of its potent heat. In its immediate vicinity, where
the outer crust was broken, and the liquid flames
roaring
and bursting through the aperture, several
peasants
were moulding the glowing lava into coarse
medallions
,
as coolly as if at work over a forge. Having
breathed the suffocating air and roamed over the
heated
scori as long as prudence permitted, I began to
retrace my steps. My passage down the mountain
was wonderfully expeditious, as I almost slid upon
the fine ashes, and had only to guard against falling.
During the descent, and from the summit, the view was
surprisingly beautiful, comprising a complete
panorama
of Naples, its unrivalled bay and adjacent
villages.
BAI.
Being
again favoured with a remarkably fine day
for the season, I retraced my course to Pozzuoli,
and continued along the sea until I reached the
Lucrine lake, which is so near the water's edge that
a small connecting canal has been formed across the
road. Dismounting, I walked around this calm
and apparently shallow sheet of water, then threaded
a pleasant winding path, which finally brought me to
the lake of Avernus, upon the banks of which is the
Sybil's cave. I inspected, with an attention which
the scenery itself never would have elicited, the
scene so minutely described by Virgil, and said to
have suggested his idea of the infernal regions. I
next stopped at the ruins of Nero's villa, and
especially
observed the vapour-baths below, formed by
the sea-water heated by the volcanic elements
beneath
the bank, and thence sending up volumes of
saline and sulphurous steam. Through several
crevices
this vapour escapes exteriorly, but its chief
outlet is into what originally constituted the
subterraneous
apartments of the villa.
Continuing rapidly on our way to Bai, I
descended
K
into the old dungeons of a Roman prison,
and visited the antique, arched and laboured
reservoir
in its vicinity. I was thus soon in view of a
large expanse of water, separated from the
Mediterranean
by a narrow and marshy fen, and bounded
on the right by a slightly declining hill,
partially
cultivatedthe Stygian lake and Elysian fields
of the great Mantuan! A promontory stretching
into the sea, and forming, in conjunction with the
land on which I stood, a small bay, is the port
Misenum. The paths leading to these sites, together
forming the whole landscape so minutely described
in the Enead, were worn by the pilgrimages of
travellers
.
The very children of the village knew my
purpose, and verbosely designated the localities.
What an indirect but indisputable testimony this to
truths, which many are fain theoretically to deny!
Many a hill and vale, many an extent of water and
tract of cultivated land of surpassing beauty, lie
unadmired
amid the vastness of our continent; and yet
these localities, even when bereft of the flowery
accompaniments of spring, and undecked with the
golden splendours of autumn, are lingered over by
devotees of every country with an interest and
sentiment
that nature's highest glories fail to inspire.
And all this because an ancient and beautiful poet
was wont to wander there, and is thought thence to
have derived many of his descriptive ideas. In truth,
where the master spirits of the earth have been, or
whatever spots their recorded thoughts have
hallowed
,
there is ever after an unfailing attraction to
beings
of a like nature.
Returning, I examined the octangular
brickwork
remain of the temple of Venus, and the more
perfect remnant of that of Neptune. Bai and its
vicinity were evidently favourite resorts of the old
Romans. Everywhere the foundations of a wall,
the archway of a subterranean apartment, or a
broken
and crude mass of plastered brick-work, denote
the former existence of extensive buildings. The
Cumen amphitheatre and lava-paved road were
passed on my way to Naples. The lovely and
expansive
view from the garden above Virgil's tomb,
an excursion in the beautiful bay, and a few walks
amid the gaudiness, bustle and beggary of the city,
completed my experiences here. It is only in the
environs that we find that tranquil classic scenery
for which Italy is renowned. There, when balmy
weather prevails, every object breathes the quiet and
picturesque influence of antiquated art and hallowed
nature.
VENICE.
Queen of cities!
Goddess of ocean! with the beauty crowned
Of Aphrodite from her parent deep!
If thine Ausonian heaven denies the strength
That nerves a mountain race of sterner mould,
It gives thee charms whose very softness wins
All hearts to worship.
I loved her from my boyhoodshe to me
Was as a fairy city of the heart,
Rising like water columns from the sea,
Of joy the sojourn, and of wealth the mart.
K 2
SCENES.
Early
on the day succeeding my arrival in Venice,
I was lolling upon the cushioned seats, and
beneath
the little dark awning of a gondola, and was
thus carried along through numberless canals; the
stroke of the oar, and occasional salutation of the
gondolier alone breaking upon the impressive
quietness
.
Passing by the old and seemingly deserted
habitations which line the less public ways, I
silently but thoughtfully contemplated the
surrounding
scene. One moment gliding beneath one
of the many short but massive bridges, another
sailing
noiselessly under a window whence some listless
observer was gazing, now coming almost in contact
with a passing gondola, and again occupying the
solitary waters of a minor course. The steps and
lower portions of the buildings, green with humid
vegetation, the mouldering walls, the sad repose of
neglect, and the palpable evidences of time's
corroding
finger, were circumstances too unique not to
be observed, and too interesting to be unimpressive.
I was introduced by the
custode
of the Tribunal
of Justice, upon the Bridge of Sighsthe lofty and
covered archway connecting the prison and palace.
I found it an exceedingly massive structure,
consisting
of two passages, the two entrances
communicating
with the general prison, and one of the two
leading into the palace being closed up. By
examining
the locality, I soon perceived the error which
has been justly ascribed to Byron, that of supposing
that a passage from the palace to the prison was a
fatal path. On the contrary, he who was so happy
as to escape the condemnation of `the Ten,' was
acquitted, or remanded to his former cell, instead of
being consigned by the private staircase to the
secret dungeons beneath. Hence to him, in either
case, the path was joyful rather than sad. Well,
however, may such a heavy and short way between
the tribunal and the jail be called the
Ponte di
Sospiri
;
for it must full often have re-echoed the heavy
sighs of innumerable sufferers. Descending by
the golden stairs, so called, I was guided to the
awful prisons beneath, and examined the rude in
scriptions and bloody stains still existent in the
gloomy vaults so long the secret scenes of suffering
and destruction.
[7]
[7]
As we crossed the Square of St. Marks, we remarked
that the pigeons did not fly hastily at our approach, and
remembered
with interest, that they were privileged natives of
the place, having been, during and since the republic, under
the special protection of government.
Landing near the church of St. Georgio
Maggiore
,
I admired, for some time, its architectural
neatness and simple grandeur. Next proceeding
to the Chiesa di Carmelitani, I was much
interested
in examining the numerous precious
marbles
which line its interior. Much time was
consumed in viewing some of the most
important
churches, and in perusing the peculiar
architecture
of many of the crumbling and blackened
palaces bordering the main canal. I remarked that
the former edifices were much lighter, and the
marbles
more vivid than is the case with most of the
churches, out of Lombardy, which I had
previously
seen. In one of these I was
interestingly
occupied in viewing the monument to
Canova
;
one of the sculptured figures which adorn it
carries an urn containing the heart of the great
artist. The Academy of the Fine Arts engaged
much of my attention. In what has been called
Titian's
master-piecethe Assumption, there seemed
to me exceeding richness without corresponding
effect; but in the `Marriage of Cana,' by
Pardaronino
,
I deemed the countenance of the bride one of
the most beautiful faces I had seen upon canvass,
with the exception of several of Raphael's
Madonnas
.
The more I saw of this peculiar school of
painting
called Venetian, the more was I captivated with
its unrivalled richness and depth of colouring, and
the more regretful of its frequent lack of powerful
expression. This latter quality seems pre-eminently
requisite for the production of any thing like
permanent
impression upon the mind of the spectator.
When I recall some of Raphael's works, the
sentiment
embodied in the picture is before me, and
strongly identified with his unequalled images; but
even after a comparatively short interval, many of
the larger pictures of the Venetian school were
merged, in my imagination, in the splendour of their
own gorgeous hues.
I next disembarked at the Rialto, interesting
from its Shakspearian associations. Alas! no rich
Venetian merchants are now to be seen upon its
still bustling walk, though every traveller will find
something of the Shylock spirit lingering yet. A
subsequent object was the Arsenal, where the antique
statues before the entrance, the various instruments
of war and torture, and the models of the old
barques, proved quite curious, and worthy of
attention
.
Several fettered workmen, prisoners, passed
to and fro in the extensive yards, and the
appearance
of active business was striking for this part of
the world.
I walked through the lower hall, and up the
deserted
staircase of the Palazzo Barbarigo, with a
sentiment of melancholy sympathy for the changes
which time and events have wrought within and
without it. Here are the very rooms which were
graced with the presence of a venerable ancestry of
Venetian nobles, which had been the home of a
Doge, the studio where some of Titian's best efforts
were completed, and the final scene of his being.
Long did I sit in the front room, in one of the old
gilded chairs, gazing upon his Venus and Magdalene,
but especially up at the weeping, yet lovely
countenance
of the latter, looming upon the air through the
encrustment of three hundred years of time and
neglect
.
I turned, too, frequently, to look upon the
painting of his daughter in the embrace of a Satyr,
and that member of the illustrious family who
patronized his young genius, and whom he has so
graphically depicted in his ducal cap. The old
Turkey carpet beneath my feet, the ancient
portraiture
around me, the musty odour of the
apartment
,
and the deep quiet which prevailed, forced me
to feel that I was indeed in the palace of an old
Venetian, and that this very room had echoed the
voice and witnessed the anxious labours of one of
the most admired of the old masters.
THE DUCAL PALACE.
I proceeded
to a scene of observation anticipated
with feelings much more deep than had been aroused
by other similar expectancies. I was about to
enter an aged and peculiar fabric, around which
some of the strongest associations of the place are
clustered. In Rome there is great generality in the
spontaneous interest with which we regard her
antiquities
.
Here an individual action, and there a
remarkable
event, hallows the locality or the
architectural
fragment. One may have his favourite scene
of history, or select from the scattered mass a single
object; but the principle in human nature, which is
the true spring of enjoyment in such observations
the principle of association is linked with the whole
site of an ancient city's greatness and decline; and
the Forum, Coliseum, Tombs, Pillars and works of
art, while they realize more perfectly the local ideas
of the observer, do not, for that reason, dissever
them from their general objectfrom Rome as a
whole. But here, there is one comparatively small,
and therefore intensely interesting point, where are
concentrated the various historical associations, from
the brightest to the most mournful; there is one
scene teeming with the dream-like memory of that
peculiar government, and of those thrilling events,
which render the very idea of Venice so richly
attractive
to the imagination and the heart.
And upon this spot I stood, amid these
shadowers
forth of the past. The dark Gothic form of the
Ducal Palace was before me, and I slowly entered
the main portal, ascended the marble stairs, and
was upon the very spot where the successive Doges
of the republic were crowned, and where Marino
Faliero was decapitated; before me the richly wrought
marble gallery of the Senate, and at my right, the
apertures to which the lions' heads were attached,
into whose extended jaws so many fatal messages of
destruction were dropped. I thought of the grave,
richly robed forms of the Venetian Fathers; of the
trembling hands and wandering glances of the
anonymous
accusers; of the gay peopling of those silent
corridors on the day when the new Doge entered
upon his office; of the happy, yet dignified bearing
of the patriarchs themselves, when they were thus
ushered into the highest station of the republic; of
the sad sternness of the old war-stricken soldier,
who died ignominiously where his fairest laurel was
won; of his young and despairing wife, and of the
outcry of the impatient multitude at the gate;
Slave, do thine office!
Strike as I struck the foe! Strike as I would
Have struck those tyrants! Strike deep as very curse,
Strikeand but once!
Byron's Doge of Venice
.
A few moments elapsed, and I was within the
Grand Council chamber, upon the immense walls of
which are pictured, in tints which time has only
mellowed, some of the most illustrious incidents in
Venetian history. There they are, enclosed in
heavy, rich gilding, as when the wise men of a free
and victorious city looked to them for inspiration.
Above are hung the portraits of the long line of
Doges, exhibiting scarcely a face which does not
bear marks of strong mind and venerable experience.
Here, too, is the gloomy interruption to the singular
corpsthe black veil and its sad inscription
hic
est locus Marini Falieri decapitati per crimine
.
I tarried successively in the chamber where were
wont to convene the Senate, the Councils of the
Ten and the Forty, and the reception-room for
ambassadors
,
even the seats of which remained
unviolated
but by decay. In the second, while studying
the paintings, a bat fluttered to and fro among the
cornicesa fit living concomitant of such a scene.
Here, too, the line of portraiture is again broken,
not by any insignia of crime, but by that of abrupt
cessation, the places prepared for succeeding Doges
presenting but a void.
L
THE ARMINIAN CONVENT.
An
hour's gondola sailing brought me to St. Lazarus,
a pretty island about two miles from Venice; and
my application to view the very interesting convent
there situated, was very politely received by one of
the venerable and worthy brotherhood, Padre
Pascal
,
who, in his dark robes and long gray beard
looked like, what indeed he may justly be called, a
moral apostle of learning. Under his kind and
intelligent
conduct I viewed this delightful
institution
;
the lovely and tranquil situation of which, the
neatness and order displayed in its interior
arrangements
,
and the works of useful and happy influence
going unassumingly on within its consecrated walls,
attracted my earnest sympathy and respect. In the
beautiful library I found books in all languages,
and a fine bust of the founder of the institution, by
Canova. At the table upon which this stood, my
conductor had given lessons in Arminian to Lord
Byron, who frequented the convent for that
purpose
,
and assisted his teacher in preparing a
grammar
of the language. In a smaller library I was
shown many interesting works printed in the
convent
:
among others, a prayer book in twenty-four
languages, Milton's Paradise Lost, and Rollin's
Ancient History, translated into Arminian by the
learned padre. Having looked at the press below,
and enjoyed the fine view from various parts of the
building, I took my leave, eminently gratified
with this visit to one of the seemingly truly
admirable
institutions extant. Its objects are primarily
the instruction of Arminian youth, the general
dissemination
of knowledge, and the cultivation of
literature
in connexion with theology. Its members,
strictly speaking, are Arminians, but education is
afforded
to others, through visits to the island.
Brethren
are continually sent forth; my good friend
himself
had been a considerable traveller, and I could
readily believe his assertion, that in all his
wanderings
,
he had found no spot like this.
THE LAST EXCURSION.
The
day was drawing to a close when I embarked
for a final excursion, and, having reached the
lido
,
passed a pleasant hour in promenading the Adriatic
shore, with that beautiful expanse of water stretching
beyond the limits of vision, and soothingly laving
the sands at my feet. Upon returning, the sun was
below the horizon, and the deep, pompous outline
of the Tyrol rose commandingly in the distance; a
rich glow suffused the face of the western sky, and
the evening star gleamed peacefully. The still
waters
of the gulf reflected with beautiful distinctness
the spires and adjoining buildings, and the few
vessels
in the port lay perfectly tranquil upon its bosom.
At that hour, when the associations of Venice are
so earnestly excited by its own quiet beauty, my
old gondolier grew communicative. To-morrow, he
said, was the anniversary of one of the most splendid
festas of the republic. On that day, fifty years ago,
the doge, senators, nobility and distinguished
strangers
embarked in the golden barge, and when arrived
at the
lido
, the former dropped a ring into the sea,
and then the whole company repaired to a
neighbouring
church to celebrate a solemn function, after
which a grand fete was partaken of at the palace, and
innumerable comfits distributed upon the piazza;
thus, yearly, were observed the nuptials of the
Adriatic
.
He had been in the service of Byron three
years and a half, and during that time, had daily,
after dinner, transported the poet to the shore, where
he rode along the sands for some hours; and often
had he followed him with the gondola as he swam or
floated for miles upon the calm surface of the bay.
The little white house to which the curious repaired
to see him mount his horse, and the convent which
he daily frequented, were pointed out; and as an
instance of his lordship's generosity, the bargeman
bid us remember that when the printer whom he
employed in Venice lost his establishment by fire,
he privately sent him a hundred louis d'ors. As
an evidence of the fallen fortunes even of the
gondoliers
,
he declared that immediately prior to the
downfall of the republic, he received forty francs
per day from two
Signori Inglesi
, for fifteen days,
beside a
buonamano
of a suit of clothes; while an
eighth of that sum is the present stipend. I induced
the old man to sing a stanza of Tasso, as I thus
approached the city. The evening gun resounded,
a band of music struck up, and silently
contemplating
the realization of my dreams of Venice, I
touched the steps of the quay, and emerged from
L 2
that silent solemnity upon the illuminated and gaily
occupied Piazza of St. Marcoto feel with him of
whom I was just conversing, that
Beauty still is here,
States fall, arts fade, but nature doth not die,
Nor yet forget how Venice once was dear.
THE FLORENTINE.
Now for a tale illustrative,
That shall delight my passion for romance,
Embodying hints authentic of some theme,
Strange place, or curious people.
I will relate
An incident that to my knowledge came
When sojourning abroad; interweaving it
With the attractive tissue-work of fancy.
CHAPTER I.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu!
Wish me partaker in thy happiness
When thou dost meet good hap; and, in thy danger,
If ever danger do environ thee.
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
`
Let
us forth, Anina,' said Antonio to his
betrothed
,
who was seated, in a pensive attitude, near the
window, and feigning to watch the coming on of
evening over the sky, though the tears which filled
her eyes might have betrayed, to a nearer observer,
that the object of her vision was meditative and
within,`Let us forth, and if the eve of parting
cannot
be joyous, our sadness will not be increased if
its hours be passed in rambling where we have been
wont, at this very hour, to yield up our spirits, in
glad unison, to the blest influences of nature. Let
me once more renew the brightest associations of my
being, in beholding, with the clear perception of
expectant separation, the river's bank, whereon I
vented, in sportive glee, the gay spirit of boyhood;
the square where, with the music of the Pergola just
dying on my ear, I have so often paused, in the still
air of midnight, and fancied that the old statues
moved in the gloom,and the garden, ay, the
garden-mount
,
whence we have gazed beyond the
cypress
grove and the river, and seen the sun go down
behind the hills; in these scenes, which I am so soon
to exchange for a strange country, let us linger away
the moments, till the hour approaches which calls
me from Florence and from thee!'
They were soon threading the gaily-peopled walk
of the Cacine, their desultory converse or silent
musings being, ever and anon, interrupted by the
passing salutation of numerous acquaintances.
Occasionally
,
too, a friend, mindful of Antonio's
approaching
departure, would leave the party whose
companionship was enlivening the evening
promenade
,
accompany them for a space, and then, with a
buona sera
, uttered with more than usual
tenderness
,
and that expressive though silent indication of
delicate sympathy which distinguishes the natural
language of the Tuscans, glide away from the
thoughtful pair. They experienced a sensation of
relief when the shades of evening advanced, and the
walk became more solitary. At that season, even
the kindly words of friendship disturbed rather than
solaced. The moonlight fell in soothing luxuriance
upon the almost inaudible ripple of the Arno, as they
approached one of the bridges which span its waters.
There are memorable instances of
effect
produced
by the combination and mutual influence of nature
and art. One of the most beautiful imaginable
now, familiar though it was, arrested the attention of
Anina and her companion. The bridge of Santa
Trinita, in the light which now revealed it, seemed
suspended by the spell of fancy, rather than
supported
by deeply laid pillars and massive workmanship.
So symmetrically and gracefully are hung its arches,
that the idea of weight is banished from the mind of
the spectator. Its aerial form, antiquated hue, and
white escutcheons, about which the weeds of age are
clustered, form an image that serves admirably to
relieve the aspect of the heavier architecture around.
They paused, and, leaning upon the parapet, Anina
broke the silence which they had almost
involuntarily
suffered to prevail. `I know not how it is,
Antonio
,
but this spot seems singularly associated with
the prominent shades of my destiny. Do you
remember
the story my old nurse tells? One evening
she was conveying me home from the Porta
Fedriano
,
where we had been to see the cavalcade of the
Duke; we did not leave the house of Signor Andrea,
from the window of which we had seen the pageant,
until the crowd had quite dispersed. Yet the Lung'
Arno was quite thronged, and several gentlemen on
horseback were reining in their steeds here upon the
bridge, and endeavouring to make their way
harmlessly
through the throng; poor Bianca was
hurrying
on to avoid dangerwhen I persisted in
stopping
to drop a
crazia
into the old
poverino's
hat.
Meantime the tumult increased; a carriage, in
addition
to the crowd, now blocked up the way; the
horses became more restive, and volumes of sparks
flashed from the polished flags beneath their feet.
Bianca, murmuring our old proverb,
uomini sopra
cavalli, sepolti sono aperti
,
[8]
[8]
`When men are on horseback, the graves are opened'
alluding to the liability to accident incident to the smooth
pavement of the city.
drew me from the
expectant
beggar and was hastily carrying me forward,
when the carriage started, and the Count P's. horse,
notwithstanding the curb, sprang after it, and threw
Bianca and her unruly burden upon the pavement.
The Count instantly dismounted, and leaving his
horse with a groom, hastened toward me. Bianca
was more alarmed than injured, but I was taken up
insensible. At this sight he seemed deeply
distressed
,
and taking me in his arms, bore me directly to
the
Caff di Colonna
. The restoratives applied
restored me; and, to the relief of the Count, I
was soon on my way home, forgetting, in
contemplating
M
the comfits he had given me, the slight
contusion
which the accident had occasioned. You
know the consequence of this eventhow the
kindhearted
man visited us the next day, and through his
influence with the Duke, obtained for my brother
the office which has since so comfortably supported
us. Nor is this all, my Tonino; here, on this
bridge, at such an hour'
`Were our vows first plighted!'exclaimed
Antonio
;
`and, O, Anina, let the memory of all we are
to each other come over us anew, now that from this
green spot of life we gaze over the desert of absence.
Strange! alas, how strange, that necessity thus forces
me forth from my home; and such a home! Before I
knew thee, Anina, I knew not myself. The
external
,
the exciting, the whirl of passionthis was
what I called life. The fountains around me were
perverted by the lips they would have refreshed.
Nature!her voice was lost. Music!I loved only
her most tragic inspiration; the pathos,the soft,
stealing melody which delights me now, then but
irritated and inflamed. I was a wanderer in a wild
scene, such as Salvator loved to depict; a light step
aroused meI looked upand in the light of thine
eye a new world opened;the peaceful yet deep
sense of joy which comes over the soul when
pondering
on one of the Madonnas of Raffaelo, played
around my heart, and threw the rosy quiet of a
summer
evening over the restless deep within. Wonder
not that I hasten from thee with forebodings---that
I mourn that my day of peace is so soon to be
superseded
by one of lone travailing---for thou knowest
my impetuous spirit must unfold itself. Thy
memory
,
the hope of return, confidence in the love
of such a heart---will such consolations ever fail or
disappoint me?'
Anina had listened in the attitude and with the
expression of one in whose mind a prevailing
sentiment
precluded the admission of minor emotions.
She had lifted her gaze from the glittering element
below as he proceeded; the constrained smile, and
disposition to withdraw her own and his thoughts
from dismal anticipations, which had pervaded her
manner, at the commencement of the interview, now
gave place to an expression indicative of high
purpose
.
Her Tuscan hat shaded without obscuring her
features, as she stood erect in the full light of the
careering luminary. She was above the ordinary
height of the women of her country, and her figure,
when in repose, might have suggested to the
experienced
eye of a continental sojourner, the idea of a
more northern extraction than she boasted. Her
dress, too, with the exception of the hat, bore no
distinctive indications whereby a stranger could have
directly surmised that she claimed affinity with the
denizens of the Etrurian Athens. But one glance
at the countenance would have dispelled the illusion
of the casual observer. The complexion, the hair,
and, above all, the peculiar depth and expressive fire
of the eye, proclaimed Anina a legitimate daughter
of Italy.
`Antonio,' she replied, `there is nothing but the
thought of what we shall gain by this separation,
that, with the blessing of the Virgin, enables me to
think of it calmly. I feel that my presence has
proved but a sad inspiration to your pencil; and
when I remember what was prophesied of your
genius, but a year since, I feel almost as if expiating
a sin in resigning you to the full influence of absence
from every thing which will enervate the energy,
or distract the attention of your mind;
then
I feel it
will pour itself forth in the exercise of your art; and
who may predict the result? Thisthis must
comfort
me, when left to abide ceaseless opposition,
while my Tonino is winning afar what will satisfy
the views of others, though it cannot alter my own;
there, if ever he gives a thought, amid his busy
hours, toto' and at the mere idea of her lover's
forgetfulness, she passed, Italian-like, from a high
and womanly seeming, to the distrustful sadness of
a child;she abruptly paused, and the tears flowed
freely. It was now for Antonio to rise to a higher
strain of feeling; with the ardent gesture and
impassioned
utterance characteristic of his country, he
soon unburthened his oppressed heart, and changed
the mood of the listener. `And now, Anina,'he
continued, `let us move homeward. Forget not,
twice every month, to place in the hands of our
faithful Ipolito, tidings of your welfare, which will
steal like rays of sunlight across my solitary
pathway
;nor
shall the old man fail to bring thee tokens
of the fidelity and experience of thy betrothed. Let
us go.' They left the bridge; and the first
glimmering
of dawn found Antonio sitting, accoutred as
a traveller, his passport beside him, his trunk at his
feet, and himself inditing yet another
addio
to one
who, at that moment, was looking tearfully from
her casement, starting at the distant rumbling of a
vettura
rolling along the deserted streets, and as it
died away, breathing a prayer for the safe return
of her lover.
CHAPTER II.
`It cannot take away the grace of life,
The comeliness of look that virtue gives,
Her port erect with consciousness of truth,
Her rich attire of honourable deeds;
It cannot lay its hand on these, no more
Than it can pluck its brightness from the sun,
Or, with polluted fingertarnish it.'
From
the little metropolis of Tuscanythe
birth-place
of Dante, Boccacio, and Machiavelli, let us
pass to an abiding-place of man less blessed by
contiguity
to the grand and beautiful in nature, and
from among its multitudinous representatives of
humanity
,
M 2
seek out and note the few individuals with
whom our story is connected. The first scene
breathes not the air of the outer and common
London
world. It is a richly furnished chamber; the
quiet that reigns, and every little arrangement,
suggests
,
at once, that it is the chamber of sickness;
but the abandoned couch and the attitudes of the
occupants, assure us that the crisis of disease has
passed, or is yet to come. Upon a rich arm-chair
reclines one whose gray hair and slightly furrowed
brow speak either of a long or laborious life
perhaps
of both;the compressed lip and unyielding
manner in which the head accommodates itself to
its comfortable support, bespeaks a pertinacity of
will, a firmness of purpose, that even bodily
weakness
has failed to subjugate. At a light and
exquisitely
wrought table beside the convalescentfor
such he issits one of those beings which, in
certain
moods, a meditative man would rather gaze
upon than aught else in the wide world. Mary
Ellmsley might not be called what is generally
understood
by the term beauty; she was too small in
figure, too mild in manner, too thoughtful in
expression
,
to win the admiration of fashion's votary, or
attract the attention of the amateur observer of the
world's inhabitants. And yet there was something
in her very gentleness, something in her full blue
eye, fair complexion, and light tresses, `brown in
the shadow and gold in the sun,' contrasted with the
mourning habiliments in which she was clad, that
insensibly charmed. A lover of Wordsworth's
poetry
,
a partaker of Wordsworth's spirit, would have
felt spontaneously and irresistibly interested as he
beheld her. At a slight movement of the sick man,
indicating his revival from the half-sleeping state in
which he had remained for some time, she arose,
and stepping, fairy-like, about the room, seemed to
busy herself in some little preparations for the
invalid's
comfort; but, now and then, she would steal
an anxious glance toward him; and when she saw
that his eye was following her motions, she abruptly
returned to her seat, and again bent over the book
upon which she had previously been intent. But
her gaze was fixed, and it was plain her mind was
busied inwardly; and the subject of her musing
could not have been altogether pleasing, for her
fingers
mechanically thrummed upon the table, and
twice she opened her lips to speak, and then, with
an embarrassed and conscious air, checked herself.
At length, in a decisive manner, she closed the
volume
and placed it away with some little care, and
breathing a half-suppressed sigh, drew her chair
nearer to the cheerful grate, and looked up to the
face of the invalid.
`You need not grieve, Mary, for the troubles of
the heroine of that tale,' said the old man; `you
know, as a matter of course, all must turn out well
at last.'
`All
is
well with her now,' she replied, `for the
groundless suspicions of man cannot harm him who
is favoured of God, and so ought Micol to feel, and
therein be comforted.'
`An odd name that for a heroine, Mary; but
novelists
must be sadly puzzled now-a-days, both for
names and subjects.'
`The author of the volume I have been reading
depended little upon such externals. His whole
mind is given to developing his characters and plot,
and polishing the language in which both are
portrayed
;
at least so Mr.I mean so I believe;for,
in truth, I have not read enough yet to understand
perfectly.'
`Pray, what is this wonderful book? I thought
you were in the midst of the new novel Lady Emily
sent this morning.'
`I was trying to read something I began some
time ago, father, but which I was prevented from
going on with by circumstancesby your
unexpected
illness, I should say; but I can't get along
with it now; I could not well understand it, and
perhaps if I did, I could not have read'
`What could'nt you understand, child; what was
you
trying
to read?'
`Alfieri's Saul, father.'
`If you had comprehended it, why could you not
read?'
`My tears blinded me, father.'
`I really begin to believe, Mary, that I have been
to blame in allowing you to share so long my
confinement
;
you need the fresh air, child. What with
our late affliction (and here the old gentleman
brushed
away a tear) and the dull duty of attending on a
sick old man's humours, you are scarcely yourself,
girl,crying over a story you do not understand!
Nonsense'
`O, father, you mistake; it was'nt the story that
made me weep; but I read on a little way, and came
to a difficult part, and then II thought'
`The meaning would come by your crying?'
`No, father, I thought who would tell me all
about it, and thinking of that made me weep.'
`Worse and worse; who do you mean? who
would explain?'
`Mr.'and she looked fearfully up, `Mr. Lino,
father.'
The pale cheek of the convalescent was now
sallow
;
his features worked impatiently, and he sat
erect. `Did I not forbid you to breathe the name
of that accursed man?' he fiercely exclaimed. `How
can you speak of him without a shudder, when you
remember the peril into which his villanous arts
brought me? Have you no feeling for your own kin?
Can you look upon me, but just escaped from a
violent
and awful death, and not
feel?
'
`Father, he may be innocent,' Mary sobbed out.
`
May be innocent?
You saw the cunning smile
with which he proffered the treacherous gift; you
heard the Professor declare that he had detected
poison; you witnessed the convulsions, the
death-like
stupor'
`Oh, speak not of them, my father! But had
we not better ask him about it? I am sure he knew
not'
`Mary,' he continued more calmly, `you are but
a child; I will once more explain, for your
satisfaction
,
the reasons of my conduct, and then I shall
expect you, as a reasonable girl, to cease henceforth
and forever, to allude to a subject which, in your
father's mind, is associated with the most painful
remembrances. I received Mr. Lino as your teacher,
with no recommendation but the impression made
upon me by his appearance. In this I was indeed
to blame; but my interest was highly excited; I
thought I befriended a noble spiritan exile from
a depressed yet glorious country. I received the
Tuscan wines, not wishing to refuse what was
offered as a token of friendship. Happily in my
own person I first experienced the workings of the
insidious poison, and prompt medical aid has availed
where it well might have despaired. And I live
live to punish a villainlive to make an example
of one of the thousand specious renegades from the
continent, who insinuate themselves into the homes
of Englishmen, to abuse their hospitality, to
overreach
,
ay, and to work their ruin!'
`What possible motive could have induced even
the thought of such an act?'
`Do you suppose I shall tax my imagination to
discover the motives of a treacherous Italian?' I
leave all such labour to the law. Let it have its
course. I have done my duty to myself and my
country.'
`But not to the exile, father!Do but see him;
perhaps he can explain.'
`I am not equal to a visit to the Old Bailey,
to-night
,
Mary.'
His gentle auditor started back, and burst into
tears; she knew not of the arrest. But soon
recovering
,
she lifted up her face to that of her parent,
who beheld, with surprise, an expression of
dignified
and wounded feeling, such as he had never
witnessed
before.
`Father! my mother used often to speak to me of
one who in the agony of a cruel death, said
prayerfully
of his enemies,
they know not what they
do
and she bade me thus ever feel toward
whomever
I should deem wrongful or unkind. Father,
forgive me!
you
know not what you do. I feel
that the stranger is not guilty of the awful crime
with which he is charged. It cannot be,the
impression
you first received is true; he is a nobleman
in soul. Oh, suffer not such a spirit to be wounded.
But I fear not for him, for he has told me that all
great minds are renewed by trial, and gather
strength from persecution. He has told me of a
philosopher of his country who was shut up in a
dungeon because he declared that the earth went
round the sun; and about a poet whom they called
mad, and imprisoned away from the fields and
bright sunlight which he loved, and then he became
mad indeed. I weep not for him, father; but in
the pleasant home of his youth, there is one who
will shed grievous tears, when the dismal tidings
arrive; I mourn for her. Father! forget your
anger
,
and to know that he whom thou falsely
deemest
thine enemy is free, his reputation unsullied,
and his betrothed unstricken, will prove to thee
more reviving than the bitter cup of revenge.
Father
!
forgive me. Vain, I see, are the words of
your Mary. May God protect the Italian, for he
is guiltless!'
A week subsequent to the conversation we have
related, toward the close of day, a young man sat
with folded arms and a rivetted gaze, in an
apartment
which, in the twilight that then revealed it,
presented an aspect of stern solidity, yet not devoid
of comfort. An easel rested against the wall; a
pallet, with some painting utensils, lay confusedly
upon the floor, and a few books were scattered upon
a small table. `Yes, Anina spake well and truly'
soliloquized the occupant.`I did need separation.
I did require a pressure from without, or a void
around me to quicken the impulses within. I have
lamented this catastrophe, I have bitterly scorned
this disgrace, long enough. And now I will wrench
sublime consolation from the very gloom of
misfortune
.
I have done all that can be done. Ere this,
Ipolito must have received my letter; true, he
knows not that I am an incarcerated man;but he
knows the suspicions under which I am placed; he
will obtain the needful testimonials; he will keep
the circumstance from Anina; the trial will at
length come onI shall be, I must be, triumphantly
acquitted, and none will recognize in my English
appellation the name of Antonio. And, meantime,
I have succeeded in effecting my purpose (and he
looked complacently upon the materials of his art)
here is light, and something of quiet. O that the
vision of yesternight would return! I must transfix
itI must embody the idea. Yes, ere long the
face of my beloved shall beam upon me, even in this
prison. I feel that I shall succeed. They have
taken my libertybut the mind is free! O for the
morning light! I yearn for day. Let me reflect.
A beautiful nun listening to the Miserere,the
attitude
that of a suppliant, the eye tearful, ay, but
enraptured by the melody, and raised in devotion,
like Raphael's St. Cecilia; the expression with a
shade of sadnessbut impassionedexalted; and
the modelah! the model shall be Anina!'
N
CHAPTER III.
`Still o'er them floated an inspiring breath
The odour and the atmosphere of song.'
The
rays of sunlight fell obliquely upon the Lung
'Arno, where a goodly concourse were moving to
and fro, or conversing in stationary groups. It was
evidently one of those days when the Italian yields
himself, with especial freedom, to the `
dolce far
niente
.' Nodding and smiling, with a
buona festa
for as many of the gay throng as glanced at her
playful demeanour, the flower-girl distributed her
violets embedded in leaves of geranium; the blind
man touched his guitar, while an urchin beside
him accompanied the monotonous strains with the
constant invocation `
dartemi qualchecosa
,' and the
licensed pauper rattled his tin cup, and implored
the lightsome beings who glided by`
per amore di
Dio
'to give of their substance. The equipage of
the Grand Duke passed rapidly from the palace
toward
the Cacine; but the Grand Duke himself
preferred
a promenade to a ride with the ladies of his
household, as one might learn from the universal and
respectful recognition manifested by the crowd of
pedestrians toward the gentleman in a brown coat,
so plainly fashioned, that it would infallibly obtain
for him the cognomen of Quaker, in certain
localities
far beyond the limits of his own little duchy.
Two disputants, beginning to perceive that their war
of words was becoming too obstreperous for the
scene and occasion, hastily emerged from the crowd,
into an open and comparatively vacant square, in
order to renew their colloquy at ease. Thither we
will follow.
`Mark me, Carlo, I speak of the action, the
expression
,
the performance throughout, and I speak
of Ronzi when she is herself.'
`And
then
you will persist, Luigi, in
maintaining
that Malibran is surpassed in the Norma?'
`That will I,
caro mio
, against whoever will
gainsay
it.'
`Thou hast then undertaken to oppose thy single
judgment to the universal sentiment. Hast heard
of Garcia's adventure at Arezzo?'
`And was not I one of the torch-bearing multitude
that attended
cara
Ronzi home from the Pergola?
But to the point,
amico mio;
didst thou not
perceive
,
last night, in her speaking countenance, every
minute shade of varying expression? Did not her
commanding figure, dignified air, eloquent eyes,
and, above all, her mellifluous voice, bring home to
thee most touchingly the passionate ideas involved
in the Norma?'
`I tell thee, Luigi, that Italy has settled the
question
;
thou art dreaming of Ronzi as she was.
Malibran
is in her prime, and Europe has awarded her
the palm.'
`There are those in Florence, Carlo, without the
precinets of thy wine-shop, who would contend with
thee on that point.'
`Not one, save thyself, Luigi.'
`
Santissima Virgine!
there was but one voice
in the parterre, on the first representation.'
`Ah,
poverino!
thy wits are unsettled by music;
thus thou speakest of each
prima donna
in turn;
she is always better than all who preceded. But
caro
, thou shalt not make all Firenze share thy
perversity
.
Nay, have patience; thou shalt be
convinced
.
If the first passer-by who hath seen the
Norma, as performed by both, doth not agree with
me, then Carlo Pisani will do thy bidding, so that it
be not to displease a customer, nor to break law.'
`I am content.'
`Here is a grave and stately cavalier;ah, he
would light his cigar.' `Ecco Signor,' said Carlo,
approaching the stranger, and proffering his flint;
`Signor, can'st say if there will be any necessity for
entering the
parterre
an hour before the time,
tonight
?'
`Is not the Norma inimitably executed?' said
Luigi.
`I have so seen it.'
`And by La Malibran?' inquired Carlo.
`By her superior in that character, at least,' was
the reply.
`Bravo!' exclaimed Luigi. `There, Carlo,' he
added triumphantly, `you see De Begnis has one
more votary.'
`That one is not me,' said the cavalier.
It was now Luigi's turn to feel disappointed.
`Prithee, Signor,' he continued, `who dost thou
think is inimitable in the Norma?'
`Signora Pasta.'
`Excuse me, you are a'
`Milanese,' replied the stately gentleman, as he
walked away, complacently exhaling the fragrant
smoke.
The smile and the shrug of the amused friends
were scarcely enacted with true Italian
expressiveness
,
when their attention was directed to the
advancing
figure of a primly attired old man. Luigi
recognized
him as an acquaintance from Prato, and
after they had interchanged a greeting, asked if he
had visited the city to attend the Opera. `Not
altogether
,'
he answered. Carlo felt again encouraged.
`Doubtless,' continued Luigi, `you think our
prima
donna
cannot be sufficiently admired?'
`I ne'er knew but one of whom I could thus
speak,' said the old gentleman, `and she is yonder.'
`At rehearsal?' asked Luigi, hopefully.
`Does Catalani rehearse for her private
entertainments
?
I had thought that, in her villa in the
environs
,
music was wholly a pastime.'
`
C'e caduto il formaggio su maccaroni
'
[9]
[9]
`The cheese has fallen on the macaroni,'
i. e.
a desirable
coincidence has occurred. When we consider in what esteem
this article of food is held by the Italians, and how
indispensable
is deemed the addition of grated cheese, the force of the
proverb is obvious.
said
N 2
Carlo, pointing to the opposite street. `Here comes
Signor Bartolomeo, who, thou well knowest, is
uninfluenced
by local prejudice, and not so old as to
sympathize only in retired opera-performers; for
thy comfort, too, know, Luigi, that he is a
connoisseur
in dramatic as well as in musical efforts.'
`And thou art not aware of his opinion of Ronzi?'
`Only generally, and not in the Norma.'
`Pardon, Signor,' said Luigi, as he took the hand
of the new comer, `tell me how you are pleased with
Bellini's new opera and its present representation.'
`It is a glorious thing, and who can do it greater
justice than the still beautiful'
`Malibran Garcia, interrupted Carlo.
`Ronzi de Begnis,' exclaimed Bartolomeo.
`Name thy requirement,' said Carlo, looking
impatiently
at Luigi.
`To-morrow,' said his friend, smilingly; `I must
consider; but fear not. I shall not be very severe;
and, for the present,
addio
.'
Ascending one of the neighbouring elevations,
whence is obtainable an extensive view embracing
the thickly clustered dwellings of Florence, her
mammoth Duomo, and the adjoining and encircling
Apennine, Luigi came upon a quiet road walled on
one side and overlooking, on the other, a broad
valley
covered with olive trees, and containing several
villas and small dwellings. Here, during most of
the day, the sun exerts its full influence, and the
walled hill-side shields the solitary road from the
wind; and here, in view of the soothing landscape,
an elderly and somewhat portly man, with a
countenance
bland in its aspect, though slightly shaded
with seriousness, was enjoying a retired promenade.
He was so intently occupied with his own thoughts,
as not to be aware of Luigi's presence until the
latter
had audibly saluted him.
`One would think, Signor Ipolito, that thou wert
not the guardian of Firenze's fairest daughter,
judging
from thy sober visage and unwontedly lonely
walk.'
`And it may be, Luigi mio, that what thou
deemest
a consoling office (and God knows it hath been)
can become the occasion of anxious musings.'
`Has aught inauspicious,
caro
, happened to thy
charge? Ne'er have I seen a more beauteous and
joyful face than was hers, when last I saw her in the
arbour-walks of the Boboli.'
`The poor child is harassed, Luigi, by one who
should prize her peace beyond the vagaries of
prideful
hope.'
`Ah! I understand you. The old lady still
opposes
the addresses of Antonio.
Corpo di Bacco!
she may wait till too late, to realize her fond project
of uniting Anina to one of noble birth. True, she
sacrificed her own wealth and nobility to the good
Francisco that's gone; but 'tis scarcely fair to force
poor Anina to regain them with the sacrifice of her
affections.'
`It is the mother's inconsistency that provokes
me. High birth has been her
sine qua non
when the
name of Anina was mentioned in connection with
matrimony. And the lack of this has been the only
fault she could find with Antonio; for a kindlier and
more gifted
giovenotto
is not to be found in
Florence
.
Yet at our last
conversazione
, when all the
company were talking of the artist with whose fame
London is ringing, the Marchioness, glad of an
opportunity
to depreciate Antonio, said to me, Signor
Ipolito, thou hast often told me that Anina's absent
admirer possessed nobility of soul and of intellect, if
not of birth; why could not he manage to get
imprisoned
and astonish the world with his painting,
as well as this unknown Florentine, if he indeed be
one?
`Were it so, Signora mia, I replied, thou wouldst
not think better of him, for he would still be a
plebeian
.
`I tell thee, exclaimed she, energetically,
Anina should marry him.
`Why, mother, said Anina timidly, the artist
would still be Antonioa mere native of Florence.
Tell me in what differs Carmilini, in this respect,
from the famed artist who is even known only as a
Florentine?
`
As the
Florentine, you mean, returned the
Signora, with emphasis. And therein, Luigi, did she
find an attraction equal even to her much-loved
family
greatness. Oh, it is a mere vain ambition that
divides Antonio and Anina. Ere long, the
Miseri
cordia
must take away their old brother, and I
could die more peacefully, was Anina under the
conjugal protection of such a man as Antonio.
I did trust that this day month, when she will attend
her cousin Beatrice to the altar, would see them also
united. Would that parental opposition were the
sole trouble, or that she had a more powerful friend
than old Ipolito!'
`And would that the friendship I bear thee
entitled
me to share thy perplexities.'
`Luigi, thou shalt know all, though it is vain to
expect a secret kept in Florence. Yet thou can'st
surely restrain thy tongue when the happiness of
such an one as Anina is involved.'
`Trust me,per St. Giovanni'
`
Bene
. Know, then, that Antonio had a goodly
quantity of our Florence wines sent to London; for
(would you believe it?) they tell me a flask of
Aleatico
costs two or three
francisconi
there;and
Tonino
rightly fancied such a luxury would furnish an
acceptable gift to his English friends. The first he
presented nearly destroyed a nobleman; suspicion
was excited; the wines were examined, and found to
contain poison. For a long time I have been sifting
the matter secretly, for Tonino charges me to be
circumspect
lest Anina learns his peril; and makes as
light as possible of the danger by which he is
surrounded
.
Carlo Pisani acknowledges he bought the
flasks of an apothecary, and that his people
transferred
the wine, by mistake, before they were
cleansed, and several of them contained the sediment
of baneful drugs. Thus the circumstance is
explained
;
but Carlo will not be persuaded to furnish an
affidavit to the facts which will alone avail, until
Antonio's safety absolutely demands it, and such he
is not convinced is the case now; he says such a
declaration
from him will ruin his business, and he
knows I am too fearful of the affair being known, to
appeal to the Police. Thus I have been kept at
bay, and I know not what course to adopt. One of
the two evils must be chosen. And each is
inimical
either to the wishes or the safety of Antonio.'
The countenance of Luigi brightened. `Thou
hast told thy dilemma,' said he, `to one able to
extricate
thee. Ere the post leaves to-morrow, thou
shalt have the affidavit.'
`Think not to persuade Carlo; what means have
you more than I? Explain.'
`
Pazienza
! He is under a promise. Dine with
me to-morrow at March's, and you shall be
informed
more fully. Trust me wholly. Hast aught
else to say?'
`Naught, save to thank heaven and thee.'
CHAPTER IV.
`
Juliet
.
How cam'st thou hither, tell me?
`
Romeo
.
By love who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandize.'
A group
, consisting chiefly of females, in whose
attire white was the predominant colour, stood in
cheerful converse upon the broadly-paved esplanade
before the church of Santa Croce. The morning
was not far advanced, yet so warmly did the sun
beat upon the marble pavement, that the long snowy
veils in which two of the party were arrayed, were
put aside, and the breeze from the mountains played
sportively among the dark ringlets of Beatrice, and
over the more pensive countenance of her cousin.
The arrival of an additional pair seemed a signal for
their commune to cease; and joining hands, the
several couples stood in order, each bearing a
wreath of flowers; and when a lad, in the habit of
the church, raised on high the heavy curtain which
hung before the entrance, the solemn tones of a
chant were faintly heard, and the little band
reverently
entered. It was evidently a marriage
procession
.
As they walked silently up the long
avenue
,
the light tread of the fair train echoed softly in
the pauses of the chant, and one might have fancied,
as he gazed from a distance, through the shadowy
expanse, that a company of spirits were passing
from their resting-place beneath, forth to some
earthly ministration. Nor were the objects around
unfavourable to the indulgence of such an idea. The
majestic figure of Dante leaning over from above
the tomb prepared in vain to receive his dust, with
his stern expression of dignified grief, the marble
personification of Italy standing in the attitude of a
mourner above the sepulchre of her great
tragedian
;
the dense entablatures, the heavy architecture,
breathed, in the dim light, a mystic solemnity. But
all these were still, and cold, and senseless; while
the bright eyes, the moving lips, the fresh and
fragrant
roses of the bridal party, spake of life, of life
in its conscious beauty and promise. And when
the gentle forms encircled, with a statue-like
quietude
,
the railing of the altar, the tremulous accents
in which the responses were uttered, the low quick
breathings, the glistening tearsthese spoke, indeed,
of the spiritual, but of the spiritual while yet
environed
with the attributes of humanity.
A slight bustle denoted that the ceremony was
concluded; yet was there no sign of immediate
separation. The officiating priest was soon engaged
in a discourse with Beatrice, which appeared to
rivet the attention of the group. The old man had
been her confessor from infancy, and with a truly
paternal interest, he was speaking of her duties and
destiny. Anina felt herself gently drawn aside, and
obeying the signal of Ipolito, she followed him to
the opposite side of the church. Soon after, the
attention of the party was aroused by a faint cry,
but whether of surprise or fear, was not clearly
indicated
,
and, for a moment, their eyes were directed
to the point whence it seemed to proceed; but there
being no repetition, and the words of the priest
becoming
more and more interesting, they were soon
absorbed again. Advancing footsteps now aroused
them, not the measured and scarcely audible tread
with which they had approached the altar, but the
firm, quick steps of confidence and expectancy.
Anina appeared, led on by a manly and graceful
cavalier, whom all present immediately recognized
as Antonio. Returning their eager inquiries and
salutations only with a smile and a nod, he
immediately
addressed the now silent priest: `Father, if
thou art not weary, a new bridal service awaiteth
thee, after which thy blessing and exhortation may
be doubly bestowed.' Astonishment was in every
face, yet the manner of Antonio proved singularly
effective, and all yielded to its influence, none
without
surprise, yet all with alacrity; and when the
campanile
announced that the sun had reached his
meridian, Antonio was the reigning star of a gay
assemblage in the house of the Marchioness, and
Anina was his bride. At a moment when her guests
were all occupied, she stole away, and entered her
mother's apartment.
O
`Mother, I knew not that Antonio could boast
relationship with a Count, still less that he had
inherited
his title.'
`Nor I, Anina. You do not mean '
`Nay, I would question thee, mother.'
`It is a vain question, my daughter, you know it
admits but one answer,' and the old lady sighed.
`And yet the untitled Antonio is my husband;
and, unless Ipolito reversed his message with thine
approval,'
`Anina, thou knowest what renders renowned
the much talked of picture called the Miserere,
purchased at
such
a price by Lord Ellmsley.
`They say it is the face of the nun.'
`Anina, they say, too, that face resembles thine,'
and the mother embraced her child, and then gazed
meaningly upon her.
A glow of delight thrilled to the heart of Anina.
`I see it all,' she exclaimed. `Antonio Camilini,
my
Antonio, is
The Florentine
!'
MISCELLANY.
Gentle or rude,
No scene of life but has contributed
Much to remember;
And if it stir the heart, if aught be there
That may hereafter in a thoughtful hour
Wake but a sigh, 'tis treasured up among
The things most precious; and the day it came,
Is noted as a white day in our lives.
O 2
ITALIAN JOURNEYING.
If in your memories dwell
A thought which once was his; if on ye swell
A single recollection, not in vain
He wore the sandal shoon and scallop shell.
Although
called by the veturino, on a January
morning, at about half past two, I had cause, as
usual, to regret my ready attention to his summons,
for it was nearly six when I was actually moving
on in the cabriolet of the carriage by the side of my
campagnon de voyage
. The thin scattered clouds
which dimmed the sky of early day gathered more
darkly as we proceeded, so that all means of
avoiding
direct contact with the rain were soon put in
requisition. It was no small disappointment to me,
when arrived at our first stopping-place, Albano, to
find myself shivering at the scanty fire of the
inn-kitchen
,
instead of roaming over the hill and about
the lake which give so much celebrity to this
village
.
One of the passengers, more hale, though I
ween not more zealous than myself, made a hurried
visit to the spot, and returned quite wet to complain
of the littleness of the sheet of water dignified with
the title of lake. When we again set out, the rain
was pouring in torrents, and the utter gloominess of
the scenery, and comparatively comfortless state of
our feelings, made the slow riding of the few
remaining hours of light, uninteresting, to say the
least. How the miserable dinner, cold quarters,
and dreary aspect of our night's shelter were gone
through with, every old traveller can imagine.
Each bore the several privations according to his
humour, though the chief consolation seemed to be
derived from the idea of home-comfort which the
contrast suggested.
A seemingly long, and equally dark ride brought
us the ensuing morning to the borders of the
Pontine
Marshes, renowned for the antiquated attempt
to drain them, and some circumstances of ancient
history in connexion with which they are
mentioned
.
The quality which has rendered them
somewhat formidable in modern timestheir
pestiferous
exhalations, was imperceptible, either from
our confined situation, or the peculiar state of the
atmosphere. We ran with great rapidity over the
fine road which crosses them, extending twenty-four
miles, and reached the Terracina Hotel, just as a
little interval of temporary sunshine occurred.
From a back window of this castle-like building, I
could gaze out upon the wide waters of the
Mediterranean
,
as they came rolling splendidly onward in
high waves, which were spurned backward by the
jutting rocks, or lost themselves moaningly upon
the sands. This most sublime object in nature I
viewed with something of the delight with which
we unexpectedly encounter an old friend, as well as
with much of the imaginative satisfaction it must
ever inspire.
The bright waters of a sea like this! They
brought to mind the fearful acts they had
consummated
,
the awful wrecks made by their treacherous
workings, the scenes enacted on their shores, the
men by whose writings they have been hallowed.
But they suggested yet more tender and awakening
associations. It was by such a medium that I passed
with a dream-like rapidity from the new to the old
world; from influences more deeply operative than
art's most perfect witchery; from my home to a
strange land. Were these waters as living
messengers
,
could one breath of my most native sentiment,
one gush of my heart's best feelings enter and roll
on within a wave, seemingly pure enough to
embody
something spiritual, until it was poured upon my
native shorehow eloquent would it be of gratitude
and greeting!
We soon crossed the pass formed by the sea on
the one side, and high hills on the other, where
Maximius posted his troops to resist the onward
march of Hannibal. This pass, like all of nature's
strong holds, is apparently invulnerable when in any
wise fortified, and in the season of flowers and
verdure
,
must present a very beautiful appearance.
We next reached Fondi, in which beggarly village
we were long detained for the examination of our
baggage. I regretted that night prevented my
having a glimpse of the building, supposed to be the
tomb of Cicero, erected on the spot where he met
so undeserved a fate. Our night at Mola was
somewhat
better than the previous one, and yet
sufficiently
dull. The moaning of the sea beneath the
windows and the splashing of the rain made most
unpromising music, while the cold stone floors and
scanty accommodations did not much counteract
its influence. The most cheering object which
met our eyes the next morning, after several miles'
ride, was the sun, who succeeded this time in
pushing
his fiery course through the cloudy crowd
which surrounded, as a troop of pressing retainers,
his imperial out-going. Some very antique-looking
aqueducts, and an admirable new bridge which
crosses the Garigliano, (anciently the Liris,) next
occupied our notice. The noon rest was at the
miserable village of modern Capua, the inn and
aspect of which, we concluded, were the worst we
had yet seen. The remainder of our ride lay over a
very dirty though level road. It was surprising to
observe that a highway so near a great city was no
more travelled or better kept than this appeared to
be. Nihght fell sometime before we reached
Naples
,
and we observed a fire, apparently burning in
a narrow and long streak upon a hill side, which
seen thus through a misty atmosphere and a long
vista of trees, was quite remarkable. It was the
distant looming of Vesuvius!
It was long before day-break, and during damp
and cloudy weather, that we entered the old coach
which was to convey us to Rome. A young
Dominican
monk, with his white habiliments,
within
,
and two German youths, without, completed the
party, and we moved tardily along, after our
passports
had been inspected at the gate. The air and
aspect, during the long day, continued to wear a
November cast, and a lonely and cold ride at night,
contributed to render our journey, at its outset, one
of those dismal experiences, so often described in
the traveller's tale. The following day proved much
clearer and colder, and toward its close, our interest
became excited by coming in view of the ground
where Hannibal obtained his signal victory over
Flaminius
.
The very tower to which the conqueror's
horse was tied, is still pointed out. The site of this
battle-ground, at the end of the lake of Trasimenus,
seemed, beneath the dim light of a gloomy sky,
quite extensive enough, and sufficiently environed
with elevations, to afford ample scope for the
manuvering
and action of ancient warfare; and its
present solitary aspect must present a wonderful
contrast to the energy and effects once developed
there. Beside that lake, in a grim old inn, we rested
till dawn, and found the first stage of our early ride
exceedingly uncomfortable, from the cold.
It was about noon when we reached Perugia, and
after a slight repast, commenced peregrinating the
old town. I was amused to observe that the
inhabitants
,
even the meanest clad, wore their cloaks
somewhat after the Roman fashion, having the right
skirt thrown over the left shoulder. In the church
of St. Dominic, we found the large window of
stained
glass, behind the altar, quite splendid, and from
its striking position and size, by far the most
beautiful
ornament in the building. Hastening to the
church of St. Peter, we were impressed with its
admirable locality, being placed upon an elevation
without the immediate circle of houses, commanding
from behind a very extensive prospect, and having
in front an ample esplanade. The pictures it
contains
are very interesting, not so much from actual
power, as on account of their authors. There are
several of Perugini, the master of Raphael, his own
master, and a few of Raphael's, which are obviously
first efforts. These evince that gradual but distinct
improvement in style and execution, by which every
art and effort of humanity is carried toward
perfection
.
Scarcely a square foot of wall is there in this
church which is not adorned with frescoes; and the
whole building, with its contents, is a pleasing little
antiquity.
On our way from this town we left the coach to
inspect another church by the road-side, which was
undergoing repairs, called the Madonna degli
Angeli
.
Here, scattered upon the cold pavement, were
some Franciscans, in their coarse habits of brown
stuff, looking more miserable in their ignorant
dejection
than any of the Catholic priesthood we had
fallen in with. Evening found us at Foligno, where
we saw little to interest us, except the feats of some
children who were leaping in a shed, much to the
amusement of a vulgar audience, and a view of the
innumerable props by which many of the older
houses, shattered by a recent earthquake, seemed to
be mainly sustained.
The next morning we paused upon the post-road,
soon after recommencing our journey, to observe
the temple of Clitumnus, now a chapel, rendered
worthy of notice from its antiquity. At Spoleto, our
noon resting-place, we were notstrange to tell
charged for attention to our passports. This was the
first town which appeared to me possessed of the
genuine characteristics of ancient interest. A
timeworn
and quiet aspect was here immediately
observable
.
Passing through Hannibal's gate, so called from
an inscription thereon, setting forth the successful
defence made by the ancient inhabitants against his
attacks, we came in view of a grand aqueduct,
supported
by long and remarkably narrow arches, and
quite massive in execution. The scenery
immediately
contiguous is the finest of its class in the route;
the grand slope of the hill, and the vivid verdure of
the evergreen pine being very refreshing to the
eye. Indeed, the appearance of the country grew
far more picturesque about this period, the range of
the Apennines becoming more lofty and variegated.
At Terni, which we reached in the afternoon, we
found a guide, and made exertions to reach the
celebrated cascade in the vicinity, before sunset.
The hilly path was ascended by means of donkeys,
which we procured at its base. Embosomed in high
and verdant hills, over the brow of one of which it
descends, is the fall. It pours nobly down, being
of a milky whiteness, and moving with a grace and
music such as alone is evinced by these beautiful
phenomena in nature. There, its white form of
beauty amid a spacious and green amphitheatre, and
crowned with silvery mist, falls ever the glorious
cascade. As a vision too sweet long to linger, it
has passed from before me; but its memory is
indelible
,
more pleasing to recall than even the
monuments
of ancient art or the peculiarities of olden
time.
Our stop the succeeding day was at the mean
village
called Otriculum, without whose southern wall
we tarried some time, looking upon the adjacent
P
country, and especially upon a narrow and greenish,
but beautifully meandering stream, trying to realize
that it was, in truth, the Tiber. We found, too, an old
castle, to beguile the time, until overtaken by our
carriage, which soon brought us to Civita Castelana.
On entering this town we dismounted, and lingered
to admire a very deep and umbrageous defile which
is spanned by the bridge. We noticed, as somewhat
remarkable, that the cathedral here, which is partly
composed of an ancient temple, has mosaic work
upon its outer front. A fine castle, which probably
gives the town its name, is the only other obvious
object of interest.
This journey, commenced on the third of
November
,
and concluded on the evening of the eighth,
would have been somewhat tedious, but for social
intercourse, and a few attendant subjects of reflection.
The almost total want of comfort at the miserable
inns, is indeed no small drawback; but my chief
disappointment
resulted from the want of beauty and
interest in the appearance of nature. The only fine
tree which met our view was the small olive of
the country. Far more glorious are the variegated
hues of autumn in America, than the monotonous
colouring which here blends so much of the
vegetative
aspect. Throughout the ride, it frequently
required
effort to realize where we were; and only
when within an old church, or in sight of an
antiquated
town, or once or twice at early morning,
between
two remarkably fine Apennine hills, did we
feel what one would deem the legitimate influences
of Italy.
Silently, and almost sadly, did I travel onward
from the Tuscan dominions towards new scenes. We
soon came upon the Apennine range, and
thenceforward
were continually ascending and descending.
A dull, warm atmosphere constantly prevailed, with
occasional rain. The aspect of nature was
consonant
with my feelings. The vapour wreathed itself
around the summits, and floated far down among
the long defiles which were ever before us. In the
evening we reached Bologna. Its arched sidewalks
give to the streets a very gloomy appearance; and
this impression was enhanced by the number of
soldiery
the
minions of Austria, everywhere visible.
We visited the churches and public promenade;
attentively
regarded the statue of Neptune, by Giovanni
di Bologna, in the principal piazza, and the leaning
tower. We also made an excursion of three miles
into the environs, and viewed the immense line of
arches, extending thence to the city. The
Campo
Santo
occupied us some time; and although some of
the monumental decorations are interesting, and the
great scale of the establishment striking, yet there
is little to create that impression which is perhaps
the only really excellent result of such institutions.
At the Academy of Fine Arts I found a higher
satisfaction, and dwelt long upon the Madonna,
Elizabeth, and the Infant Jesus, in the act of
blessing
Saint John, the Madonna della Pieta, and the
Slaughter of the Innocents, by Guido Reni; St.
Cecilia
listening to a Choir of Angels, and surrounded
by St. Paul, St. John, St. Augustine, and the
Magdalene
,
particularly interested me, as being one of
Raphael's, and in his last style. An expression of
fervid enjoyment is singularly obvious in the
beaming
countenance of St. Cecilia. Many pictures also,
by Francia, drew my attention, he being the
contemporary
of Raphael, and remarkably developing his
style. There is, too, a fine work of art by
Domenichino
the
Martyrdom of St. Agnes. Upon
departing
for Ferrara, we were almost at once upon the
plains of Lombardy, and our remaining journey
formed a striking contrast with its preceding
portions
.
The poplar, peculiar to the country, bordered
the road, but in form it is not comparable with what
I had seen at home; the mulberry, too, prevailed,
and, as we learned, was cultivated wholly on account
of the silk manufacture to which it ministers;an
extensive affair here. The solitude was striking, nor
was it diminished essentially when, shortly before
sunset, we reached Ferrara, the principal
thoroughfare
of which city alone seemed well inhabited; many
broad streets presenting a perfectly destitute
appearance
.
I found Byron had not taken a poetical license
when he called them grass-grown.
The comparatively ordinary monument to Ariosto,
in the promenade, was the only object of interest
which we had the time to seek. The succeeding day
we crossed the Po, an apparently sluggish stream,
environed by an exceedingly flat country. After a
weary examination of our luggage, at this
commencement
of the Austrian dominions, we continued our
route through such a quiet and dead plain, that the
sight of Monte Silece, and its three adjacent
elevations
,
was quite refreshing to the eye. At a village
at the foot of this mountain we passed the night,
and every previous hour of light was delightfully
spent in viewing the seemingly interminable plains
from various points of the hill.
As I stood upon the old terrace in front of a rough
grotto (containing full length figures of St. Frances,
the Madonna and Saviour), looking forth upon the
almost boundless prospect, and then wandered among
the ruins of a castle, upon the hill's summit
observed
the old towering broken palace, with no
living
object about it but the figure of a withered crone,
knitting at the door; I thought I had never seen a
spot so in unison with the legends of the middle
ages, which romance has hallowed and adorned. As
we returned, the numerous cypresses attracted our
attention. We entered a little church, where was
a knot of village girls, with their white mantillas
and black eyes, engaged in their devotions. Upon
emerging we noted a youth, whose dress and
manners
seemed too studied for accident, in such a spot;
we were not long in surmising his intentions, for
P 2
among the maidens, came forth one singularly
beautiful
;
her head was tastefully adorned with flowers, and
her air somewhat sprightly and confident. I doubted
not she was the beauty of the village; and as the
young man smilingly glided along by her side, and
at the turn leading to the town, darted into a narrow
by-path, I read a tale of love, of love in its
springtime
,
and sighed as I thought what might be its
harvest
.
The next morning we arrived in Padua, and
the busy and cheerful aspect of the place, it being
fair-day, at once interested and pleased me. Two
or three hours were satisfactorily passed in
viewing
the churches:that of St. Antonio (the patron
saint of Padua) is a grand structure, and the Scuola
adjacent interesting. I admired the free, clean
aspect
,
and sculpture ornaments of St. Justin, but
lingered
longest in the court and corridors of the old
university, where were assembled a finer collection
of young men than I had before seen in Italy,
awaiting
the lecture hour. I entered one of the high,
dark chambers, where a professor, in his black and
ermine bound robe, was questioning a large number
of students in the subject of his prior discourse on
jurisprudence. There was something which brought
home forcibly to my mind, in the liberal, studious,
christian aspect of this institution, and indeed of the
whole city.
After dining at the Acquila d'Ora, three hours'
riding brought us to the shore, whence we embarked
in a gondola. The ocean queen lay before us,
stretching
her line of building tranquilly upon the still
waters
.
In an hour we were in the main canal. I
looked up to the antiquated and decayed buildings,
the time-worn, yet rich architecture of the palaces;
I felt the deep silence, the eloquent decay, and long
before the gondola touched the steps of the hotel, I
realized that I was in Venice.
THE AMATEUR.
There Art too shows, when Nature's beauty palls,
Her sculptured marbles, and her pictured walls;
And there are forms in which they both conspire
To whisper themes that know not how to tire:
The speaking ruins in that gentle clime
Have but been hallowed by the hand of Time,
And each can mutely prompt some thought of flame
The meanest stone is not without a name.
As the chief intellectual influence of Italy is that of
the fine arts, one of their prominent intellectual
results is to render us amateurs. Observation is
engrossed with forms and sounds; the eye and ear
evince a hitherto inexperienced capacity for
enjoyment
.
The musicthe universal, metaphysical
music
of the landinvites to the cultivation of the
hearing powers, and the ever-present forms of art
lead to a practised attention of the visual organs; so
that we find ourselves insensibly drawn from the
study of social circumstances, to that of influences
far more abstract, but from their intimate connexion
with humanity, with genius, taste and feeling, not
less rich in overpowering interest. It is indeed
remarkable under how many different aspects the
studious observation of the productions of art
ministers
to mental gratification. They may be regarded
with the eye of an artist, solely as illustrative of the
various schools, or as embodying the true principles
of his profession; or, by the student of human
nature, as affording a beautiful exposition of the
several epochs in the history of the development of
mind; while the tasteful votary of letters delights
in comparing their distinctive characteristics with
those of the master-spirits of our race, whose
thoughts are embodied in literature. The bold and
sublime efforts of M. Angelo, the beautiful
expressiveness
of Raphael, the mellow and rich pencillings
of Claude, the wild genius of Salvator, and the
highly finished style of Leonardo, present to him
striking and interesting analogies with what is
familiar in the sister art of writing. It has been
well observed, that the bases of these arts touch
each other.
The genuine amateur, won by the attractions,
and attached by a spontaneous and intelligent
sympathy
with the delicate dependencies and
distinctions
which enter into the composition of external
symmetry, beauty and grandeur, gives himself to
the study and enjoyment of the abstract and
embodied
principles of art. In such an one, the first
emotions
of simple pleasure have expanded into
profound
and inspiring interest, and the lights of
acquired knowledge and improving judgment have
redoubled the primitive sentiment of pleasure,
derived
from these sources. Versed in the laws,
according to which all physical grace and beauty
exist, accustomed to find pleasure in every object
which developes these, and ever quick to detect
them wherever existent, the world is to him full of
enjoyment. Art's most glorious products are as
cherished friends, ever awakening satisfaction, and
affording consolation; blest with innumerable visions
of beauty, garnered from imagination's pencillings,
under nature's tuition, and glowing with a
deliberate
enthusiasm, which has become an instinctive
principle, himself is his greatest resource. Nor are
such enjoyments without a favourable moral, as well
as intellectual benefit. The student and admirer of
the noblest human productions, who has become
such from native sentiment and discriminating taste,
is allied to his race by a new and interesting bond;
he may be said, with peculiar truth, to love in
humanity
,
what is truly worthy of devoted affection
her capacity of exalted effort. And however vague
and ill-sustained such a feeling may be abstractly,
no regard can be more intelligent and vivid, when
cherished through the medium of mind's most
hallowed
fruits. These give life to and sustain, in the
devoted mind, a free and grateful respect, the
legitimate
spring of genuine philanthropy.
The true amateur, then, least of all men, deserves
the charge of unworthy selfishness; few obtain their
ends with less expense to their fellow beings, or in
the process of self-gratification diffuse happier
influences
.
Perception and taste, in some form or other,
are universal, and if uncorrupted, whatever be their
peculiarities, co-exist with a high and pure moral
sense.
Every magnanimous spirit is rendered happy by
the just appreciation of the results of mind,
whatever
be their character or origin. A mere general
sentiment of approbation or censure in relation to
remarkable works of human art, is unworthy a good
understanding; and while we rejoice in liberal
judgments on such subjects, discriminating views
are alone satisfactory. Hence the acknowledged
moral beauty of just criticism; it is the only true
praise, the only improving censure. Happy,
therefore
,
is it, that there are men so constituted as to
find much of their happiness in the noble duties of a
genuine amateur; men who rejoice in the deliberate
indulgence of their intellectual tastes more than in
devoting them, with a fatal exclusiveness, to the
purposes
of ambition; who become, as it were, the high
priests of art, and in their studious and sincere
devotion
,
waft the most acceptable incense to the
spirit of genius.
A GLIMPSE AT BASIL HALL.
Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
At
the palace of the prince Borghese in Rome,
several young English and American artists were
engaged in copying the renowned productions of
the old masters. Portray to yourself, kind
reader
,
two large halls, the walls of which are lined
with paintings, and intercommunicating by a
side-door
,
now thrown open for the benefit of the
parties
.
In the first of these apartments are erected
three easelsbefore which, in the attitude of
painters
,
standfirst, a Virginian, intent upon the
exquisite
Magdalen of Correggio,opposite, the native
of a country-town of Great Britain, transferring, as
nearly as possible, the Prodigal Son, of the great
Venetian,while, within a few feet of the former, a
Londoner is travailing for the inspiration of Titian,
by contemplating his `Sacred and Profane Loves.'
The artists may thus be said to occupy, relatively,
the three points of an isosceles-triangle. Gaze now,
through the above-mentioned passage, and behold,
at the extremity of the second and lesser hall, the
figure of a Baltimoreanfancying, perchance, the
surprise of the natives when they see
his
copy of
the inimitable Cupid beside him.
These worthy followers of the rainbow art were
wont to amuse themselves, and beguile the time,
with conversations upon the merits and manners of
their respective countries; and occasionally, by a
very natural process, such amicable debates would
assume not a little of the earnest spirit of
controversy
.
Then would the brush fall less frequently
upon the canvass, the eye linger less devotedly
upon
the great originals around, and, ever and anon,
the disputants would step a pace or two from the
object of their labours, raise aloft their pencils
as if, like the styles of the ancients, they
subserved
equally the purposes of art and of warfare,
or wave their mottled pallets as shields against the
arrows of argument. A full history of these
discussions
hallowed
by the scene of the combat,
diversified
by the characters of the combatants, and
dignified
by the nature of the points contestedwould
doubtless be a valuable accession to our literature.
The great topics of national policy, domestic
manners
,
republicanism, aristocracy, slavery, corn laws,
&c., as unfolded in the elegant and discerning
disputations
of the absentees in a Roman palace, would
prove something new, vivid, and seasonable. But
to me falls the humbler task of narrating one scene
of the drama, as illustrative of the wisdom and safety
of the advice of Polonious.
Q
On a day when the war of words had run
unusually
high, there was a momentary, and, as it were, a
spontaneous quietude. After the manner of their
predecessors in the same city, years by-gone, the
gladiators rested upon their arms. There was an
interlude of silence. They gradually reassumed the
appropriate occupations of the hour; and a few
unusually
fine touches were bestowed upon the
slowly-progressing
copies, when the aspiring portrayer of
the beautiful parable thus opened a new cannonade:
`Well, smooth over, as you may, the blot of
slavery
,
and deny or palliate, as you best can, the
charge of non-refinement, the world will never
admit
the existence of true civilization in a country
where so barbaric a practice as
gouging
prevails.'
At the commencement of this speech, the pencil
of the Virginian had stopped transfixed within an
inch of the pensive countenance on his canvass; and
with nerves braced in expectancy, he awaited the
issue. And when the orator, like a second Brutus,
paused for a reply, his adversary was muteperhaps
from indignation, probably in the absorption
consequent
upon preparing to refute and chastise. The
Londoner wheeled around, and, with a nod of
congratulation
to his brother-islander, and a provoking
and triumphant smile upon the Virginian, begged to
be informed `of the origin and nature of the
American
custom of gouging?' When, lo! there were
heard quick steps along the polished floors, and as
the eyes of the artists followed their direction, the
form of the Baltimorean emerged from the adjoining
hall. His painter's stick, pallet, and brush, were
grasped convulsively in his left hand, as with
energetic
strides he reached the centre of the arena, and
gazed meaningly upon the disputants.
`You would know, sir,' he exclaimed, eyeing
fiercely the hero of the British capital, `what is
gouging? Go, sir, to Basil Hallyour literary
countryman
;
when ascending the Mississippi,
he
was put
on shore by the captain of a steamboat for
ungentlemanly
deportmentand on the banks of that river,
sir,
he was gouged!
' As the last emphatic words
exploded, a gentleman, who had been viewing the
paintings, abruptly left the room. The Londoner
looked wonders, his compatriot tittered, the
Cupidlimner
wiped his brow. `Who was that?' inquired
the Virginian. `That, sir, was Captain Hall!'
THE OPERA.
Can it be said, that there is such an art as that of music for
those who cannot feel enthusiasm? Habit may render harmonious
sounds, as it were, a necessary gratification to them, and they
enjoy
them as they admire the flavour of fruits or the ornament of
colours; but has their whole being vibrated and trembled
responsively
,
like a lyre, if, at any time, the midnight silence has been
broken by the song, or by any of those instruments which
resemble
the human voice? Have they in that moment felt the mystery
of their existence, in that softening emotion which re-unites our
separate natures, and blends in the same enjoyment the senses and
the soul?
Were
it only that the opera, like every national
entertainment, is typical of the general taste, and in
Italy affords the most free arena for talent, to an
observant traveller it must be highly important;
but it is by the strong constraint of earnest sympathy
that I dwell upon its character and influences. In
point of excellence, simply as a popular diversion,
it is unrivalled; and the chief, if not the only
exception
,
which can be made to its detriment, springs
from the deficiencies, not of the amusement, but of
those to whose good it is designed to minister. For
the want alike of that physical organization upon
which the pleasure derivable from music depends,
or of the sentiment and feeling, according to which
that pleasure is bounded, must equally be
denominated
deficiencies, since they bar a species of
gratification
as refined as it is rich and absorbing.
But it were indeed unjust to truth and human
nature, to regard the opera, in its genuineness, solely
as one of those means which the selfish ingenuity of
man has contrived for occupying or even solacing
the intervals of active existence. Its origin and
legitimate intent are far higher and better; and
although many may avail themselves of it for
purposes
of convenience, or at the suggestion of that
restless craving for fashionable baubles, which is the
besetting sin of the thoughtless, there are, and must
ever be, better spirits to whom justice will refer its
claims.
As a subject merely of speculation, the opera
might be deemed an unphilosophical representation
of humanity. As her master passions are ever
developed at once and fervently, the idea of
exhibiting
them through the regular and measured medium
of song, would seem essentially unnatural. Yet, as
it is impossible in the drama to render the illusion
complete; as in the most perfect efforts of the
dramatist
,
and the actor, the
unreal
is palpably evident;
in adopting a more deliberate and pre-determined
form of expression, nothing of imitative excellence
is lost, while, in general effect, much is gained. In
the opera, art and nature unite in their highest
excellence
.
There is all the power of stage effect, the
P 2
language of gesture and expression, the conventional
paraphernalia of the theatre, with the superadded
power of the most expressive melodythat of the
human voice exerted to the highest point of its
natural capacity, and cultivated by the intervention
of one of the most scientific and arduous of studies,
to a degree almost incredible.
If speech is the readiest means of moral
expression
,
and what has been termed the natural language
the most unstudied and apposite, music, the
breathing
forth of the spirit in song, is the most spiritual,
and therefore, more beautifully and delicately
typical
of the varying emotions which inspire it. To
this form of expression we turn not, indeed, in the
most passionate moments of experience, but when
to these the calmer mood has succeeded, when love
begins to assume the settled and deep character of a
passion, when the shock of grief has given way to
its calm sadness, and kindling hope slowly lessens
the early heaviness of disappointment; when the
quiverings of indecision have become composed
into clear fixedness of purpose, and the sense of
overwhelming joy is fast losing itself in the deep
peace of conscious happiness;in such ultimate
stages of the passions, when their restless elements
have become, in a measure, tranquillized, and their
language more deliberate, then is it wont to pour
itself forth in measured, but moving song. And if,
in the opera, the limits of this natural order are
occasionally
exceeded, what is it but an exercise of
that poetical license, upon which even philosophy
must contentedly smile?
The opera is the grand result of a general and
discriminating passion for music. Without such a
proximate cause its existence is truly impossible.
It is this which gives rise to and sustains, not only
the institution, but that remarkable and scarcely
appreciated talent, which is its vital principle. It
has ever been more or less the custom, even in the
most civilized communities, to regard those
individuals
,
whose lives are devoted, and whose present
happiness is involved, in thus ministering to the
general pleasure, with any sentiment rather than
that of grateful respect; the evidence of this is to be
found in the actual moral rank assigned to such a
profession, and its cause is too often, doubtless,
attributable to want of character in the members,
and to that proverbial capriciousness which society
ever evinces in relation to those professedly devoted
to its diversion. The actual sympathy and
respectful
consideration cherished and manifested by the
Italians for their favourite entertainment, and its
worthy children, is most interestingly obvious to a
stranger. It is, too, delightful to observe the
conduct
,
the effect, all the phenomena of an Italian
opera. Evening after evening we behold the same
countenances intently studious of the performance,
the same votaries luxuriating in melody, criticising
intonationsEpicureans at the banquet of Euterpe.
So well regulated is the police, and so genuine and
universal the taste for music, that order, attention
and quiet are effectually secured. The audience,
indeed, go thither to partake of an habitual
gratification
.
No sound but a
brava
spoken, as by one
deep voice, during a momentary pause, or the full
burst of general approval, interrupts the pervading
silence.
And what the general will of a people supports,
equally in the way of amusement as in the graver
concerns of life, must bear the impress of national
character, and for this, if for no other reason, should
merit respect. This is singularly true in relation to
the opera. Happy is that people whose taste has
induced, whose discrimination has improved, and
whose characteristic interest well sustains this
morally
beautiful entertainment.
To define justly the surpassing charms of Italian
vocal music is indeed impossible; and yet, if in so
entrancing a pleasure as that derivable from this
source, self-analysis be practicable, perhaps it will
be discovered that in this, above most other species
of melody, all the faculties are gratified. The
ingenious
combinations and intricate art delight the
mental perceptions, its unanticipated variations and
undiscernible power and facility of development
captivate the imagination, while passion is excited
by the imperceptible encroachments of its
enchanting
harmony over the empire of the heart. There
is indeed a kind of universality in this singular, this
unequalled vocalism. The heart often beats with
eager enthusiasm, when the notes of martial music
swell upon the air, an elevating sense of grandeur is
awakened by the deep tones of a sacred choir, and a
national air or household stave, by the force of
association
,
will electrify the auditor. Yet something
of all these effects, and something beyond and above
all of them, can faithful introspection detect in the
bosom agitated, soothed, inspired by the higher
efforts of an Italian professor.
To the susceptible
student
of its influences, the
opera, in its perfection, is a poetical representation
of the deep things of life; of those passions which
operate most powerfully and universally in the
human
heart, of that mysterious and intricate connexion
between motive and action, sentiment and thought,
imagination and truth, which, in its development,
constitutes the living poetry of our being. Such an
one understands the mental experience of Alfieri,
who says that the plots of some of his best tragedies
were conceived while listening to the grand opera.
And what medium like musicmusic with all its
depth and pathos, all its subtlety and infinity of
expression
,
all its spiritual magnetism, for portraying
to the heart its own indescribable capacity of feeling?
And what an order of talent is that, which can
successfully
wield the power of expression requisite
for a genuine opera-performer!
The votary of imaginative and intellectual
happiness
finds in this pleasure a satisfaction similar in
kind, though much more exalted, to that which the
lover of physical science discovers in analyzing and
combining the elements of matter. There is the
same eager delight, which springs from the vivid
knowledge acquired only by searching and
successful
experiment; but it is experiment upon self, not
that which developes the anatomical relations of the
body, but that which lays open, by a beautiful
process
of excitation, the delicate machinery of the
inner and unseen being; it is the yielding up of
one's native sentiment to the heavenly sway of the
deepest melody, till its elements dissolve and
combine
in all the purest and most perfect forms of
emotion. How palpable to the heart becomes its
capacity of love, in all its endless modifications, and
how keenly brilliant to the imagination shine its
own magic energies, when both are bathed, excited,
dissolved within the limitless scope of deeply
undulating
music!
MY HOME ABROAD.
Ah! where shall I so sweet a dwelling find!
For all around without, and all within,
Nothing save what delightful was and kind,
Of goodness favouring and a tender mind
E'er rose to view.
How
much to be commiserated is he to whom not a
line of the poetry of human nature has been directly
revealed; who has never been lured from the sterile
pathway of isolated pursuit, by a flower that smiled
up to him, or a murmur that fell soothingly upon
his ear; whose mind has never been charmed into
blessed self-forgetfulness, by the consoling activity
of native sentiment. It was but the impulse of
inalienable
human feeling which led Sterne to say, that
if he were in a desert, he would love some cypress;
and baffled, indeed, must be his spirit who has
wandered
to and fro in a peopled world, and found no
child of humanity whose companionship and
affection
could recall the simple joyousness of early and
unsophisticated being. How much does the
pleasure
of a sojourner in the fairest lands depend upon
the position whence he gazes forth upon their
domain
,
upon the immediate social influences by which
he is surrounded, upon his
home abroad!
How
different
will be the aspect of external nature and the
impressions of social or moral phenomena, to the
wanderer who looks forth from his own solitary
consciousness, and to him who views them through
the loop-holes of a domestic retreat! This is not a
merely speculative suggestion, as I propose to
illustrate
,
if the reader will but pass, in fancy, to the
favourite
city of Italy, once the scene, and at present
the witness of Lorenzo de Medici's authority and
enterprise.
The high and dark buildings which line the
narrow
and flag-paved street, running from the Piazza
di Colonna to the Mercato Nuovo, render its
general
aspect peculiarly sombre; yet at the season when
the fiery solar influence is at its height, it is truly
refreshing to turn from the dazzling heat of the open
squares into these shady by-streets, so characteristic
of the cities of southern Europe. The second range
of apartments of one of these edifices was occupied
by a family whose fortunes received their downfall
under the Napoleon dynasty. The comfortable and
quiet seclusion adapted to their condition, succeeded
a more brilliant, but perhaps less happy
establishment
.
At the close of a winter's day spent in the
delectable employment of inspecting `lodgings for
single gentlemen,' I found myself settled in one of
the front rooms of this buildingthe domicile I had
at length decided should be my temporary abode.
As I sat musingly before a cheerful wood fire, my
reverie was interrupted by a gentle tap at the door;
and scarcely had the
entrate
passed my lips, when
it quietly opened, and the presiding goddess of that
little world was before me. The countenance of
Antoinetta exhibited features so beautifully regular,
that even when in perfect repose, they would bear
the most critical persual. But it was when lit up
by a cheering smile, playing over and enlivening
their bland expression, such as they wore when she
thus broke in like sun-light upon my misty
daydreaming
,
that the witchery of her eye and the
pleasantry
of her air, exerted their full power. In the
sweet accents of her native tongue, she bade me good
evening, adding that she had thought the Signor
might feel solitary, and had brought in her muslin
work to sit an hour with him. How thankfully he
accepted the proposition need not be related. The
converse of that evening sufficed for our mutual
understanding
.
For, be it known to you, kind reader,
that the social, like the physical atmosphere of Italy,
is wonderfully insinuating; one discovers his
adaptation
at once. The Italians seem to know
intuitively
the latent points of sympathy between
themselves
and those with whom they come in contact;
a short time serves, either to convince them that
their acquaintance never can become a friend, or to
make him so almost immediately. Nor is this all.
Let a genuine Italian discern but the glimmerings of
R
congenial sentiment, and you have his confidence;
and, if there be aught noble within you, the very
alacrity with which you are trusted, will secure it
from abuse. My fair
padrona
was betrothed to a
countryman then in Britain, and her mother had
resigned to her the duties of housewife, while she,
Italian-like, devoted her more mature years to the
exercises of religion, and to basking in the sunshine
of imaginative enjoyment.
The Countess was a genuine specimen of a
Tuscan
lady of the old school. She still retained
sufficient
matronly comeliness to attest her youthful
beauty, and her habits and conversation clearly
evidenced
the cultivation of a naturally good mind, and
the urbanity of a kindly spirit; yet withal was there
the strict devotion of the Catholic, and the never
absent enthusiasm of the Italian. There was a
dignified
earnestness and grace in her manners, which
almost insensibly inspired respect and interest. I
could not but mark the different results of a convent
education upon the mother and daughter. The faith
of the former was fixed thereby, while the latter
used to tell me that, until her twelfth year, having
lived chiefly in a nunnery, she was truly
una
angiola
;
`but,' she added, `when I came into the world,
I saw that much of what I had been made to believe,
was
una bagatella;
I saw I had been imposed upon,
and so I don't think much of the whole matter.' A
commentary this upon any thing like hood-winking
in early education! The mother earnestly
sympathised
with the past. Her
nobilita
, the shadowy
remnant of former days, was her much-loved and
constant theme. Her early and affectionate interest
in me was at first unaccountable, until I learned the
romantic sentiments with which the very name of
American was associated in her mind. Her ideas
on the subject were derived, in no small degree, from
the novels of the
Seconda Valter Scott
, as she
called
Cooper, the translations of which she had eagerly
pondered; and prejudice not a little strengthened her
partiality, for she declared that the Italians were
abused by the French and despised by the English.
But there was yet another cause for the good lady's
maternal regard:for I was ever spoken of as
nostra
Enrichino
and
bambino di case
, epithets, as the
Italian
scholar is aware, of no small endearmentshe had
conceived the idea of making me a Catholic; and if
she failed, I was learned a beautiful lesson in the art of
proselyting, worthy of the pure spirit of Christianity.
Methinks I see her now, that ardent votary of the
church, as, her eye lighted up with fervent feeling, she
poured forth, in measured and liquid accents, her
elo-quentappeals
.
Nor can I recall but one instance when
zeal betrayed her into an impatient expression. A
Capuchin friar drew crowds to the cathedral, for
many days of the holy week, and his harangues were
the subject of general eulogium. His whole
appearance
betokened the practical devotee of the Romish
faith. His coarse robe was girded about his waist
by a rope, and the cowl being thrown far back,
displayed
a countenance upon which care had traced,
in withering lines, the marks of premature age; the
hair fell thinly over high temples which shaded a
face incessantly wearing an expression of anxious
despondency. He would walk to and fro, in the
marble pulpit, ever and anon prostrating himself
before a crucifix, and imploring inspiration, or lean
over and earnestly address his audience. To this
priest the Countess would fain persuade me to
repair
,
that I might inquire and be enlightened. She
described his benignant spirit, his self-sacrificing
piety, and finally his literary attainments. To evade
the suggestion, I spoke of my comparatively slight
acquaintance with the language, and my consequent
indisposition
to attempt controversy with so finished a
scholar. She surveyed me intently, and, at length,
half-mournfully, half-reproachfully, exclaimed,
ecco
il diavolo
. But the usual tenor of her efforts was
so disinterested, and marked by such delicate
consideration
,
that I respected, spontaneously, her
advocacy
of the views she deemed so vitally true and
important. Indeed I loved to listen to the voice of
so gentle a controversialist, modulated by the true
spirit of human kindness, and inspired by an
unaffected
interest in a stranger's welfare.
There was a delightful characteristic in these
specimens
of woman in Italy; taste was subordinate to
sympathy. With all their love of the beautiful
the idea of suffering most immediately and
permanently
awakened their affections. They were never
weary of descanting upon my predecessor in the
occupancy
of their apartments; and I soon discovered
that it was the view of his tears shed over a letter,
which revealed to them the cause of his prevailing
sadness, that first drew forth their kind regard. My
quondam friend was one of that most curious
species
of the
genus homo
, found in Italyan artist,
who had nurtured a natural propensity to silent
musing
by three years of loitering in the sunny air of
Italia. Inexplicable to them was what they
called
his
melanconia
, and vain my asseverations
that it was merely a constitutional habit; no;
children
of emotion as they were, it was confidently
referred
to some disappointment of the affections, and
all their kindly energies were bent to win my
moody
amico
to hilarity. Nor were their efforts in
vain. My lodgings soon became his favourite
resort
;
and few things drew him so effectually from his
abstraction as the vivacious chat of my affable
hostesses.
I have ever taken a kind of Epicurean delight in
the observation of my species; but
here
, it was
intellectual
character which had been prominently
displayed
;
there
, I learned many a beautiful lesson in
the chapter of human sentiment and feeling. The
icy partition of cautious reserve through which one
is frequently obliged to mark the heart's workings
in colder latitudes, is, in that genial region, dissolved
by their very intensity. I could sometimes almost
fancy myself gazing through the vista of years upon
R 2
a kind of primitive humanity, in beholding the
responses
of feeling vibrating so directly to the spell
of music, the eloquence of art, or the impulse of
poetic sentiment. I recognised, as never before,
That secret spirit of humanity,
Which 'mid the calm oblivious tendencies
Of nature, 'mid her plants and weeds and flowers,
And silent overgrowings, still survives.
Happily, then, was I located for experimenting in
a new field of my favourite study. The Countess
instructed me in the enthusiasm of faith; the
Contessina
in the poetry of life; to the one I expressed
my impressions of Italy as she is; and my
reverence
for her as she was; to the other I spoke of her
absent betrothed, and brought votive offerings
gleaned
from the
bouquets
of the flower-girl. How have
I seen them start, and pale as the solemn chant of
the
mort
, or the toll of the
Campanile
broke
indistinctly
upon the ear, amid the cheerfulness of our
evening
coteries;
how have I read the varying
scenes of a drama typified in the meaning and
rapid
changes of their expression! Under their
espionage
did I wander through the verdant precincts of
the palace garden, and gaze upon the ceremonial and
the fte, and they interpreted to me the local
characteristics
of the place and people. And so weeks
and months glided on; how swiftly! Twice, in
preparation for departure, was my portmanteau taken
from its dark corner; but it would not do. The
Countess started back when she beheld it with a
sorrowful
exclamation, and it was consigned to its former
repose. At length the spring had fairly opened, and
there was no excuse for delay. And shall I attempt
to describe the feelings with which I left `my
home abroad?' No, it were a vain endeavourfor
it would require a full delineation, with more than a
painter's fidelity, of the several elements which
combined to render it a
home;
but, while all this is
waived in detail, it is embalmed in an affectionate
memory; yet not altogether in vain, gentle reader,
will you have taken this glimpse, if it serve to
brighten in your mind, severer portraitures of the
Florentines of the nineteenth century.
A SICILIAN POET.
`Young, and of an age
When youth is most attractivewith a look
He won my favour.'
I had
threaded the ever-bustling street of the
Toledo
,
in the city of Naples, and satiated, for the time
being, my passion for observation, in glancing at the
motley specimens of humanity so characteristic of
the over-populated cities of Europe. The splendid
equipages of wealth, hard pressed by the low carts
of the market venders; the gaily-accoutred
exquisites
of the metropolis; the coarsely clad peasant;
the maimed and wo-begone mendicant; the buffoons
and the soldiery; the dark-robed priest and the
bewildered
stranger, combine to render this a scene
unequalled for the contrasts it presents, and the
sounds of which it is redolent. These contrasts I
had gazed upon till the eye and the heart were alike
weary; these sounds I had endured till their
deafening
noise was insupportable; and entering the
Coronna di Ferro
, a
tratoria
, renowned for its
beef-steaks served up
a la mode Anglais
, I
prepared
to discuss mine, and eschew, for a while, the
ceaseless confusion of the grand
strada
.
My neighbour at the table proffered a kindly
word, and I turned to mark him. He was a young
man of graceful mien, with the dark eloquent eye of
the country, and his pale complexion and
expression
of thoughtful intelligence betokened an
intellectual
character. `
Voi siete Inglese, Signor?
he
inquired. `No,' I replied, `
Sono Americano;
'at
the word his eye brightened, and a sentiment of
romantic interest seemed to excite him. He spoke
enthusiastically of Washington and Franklin, and
insisted upon an adjournment to his lodgings. I
found him to be a Sicilian by birth, and a poet by
profession. He was very curious to learn the
extent
of the liberty of the press in Americaand
when informed, was in alternate raptures and
dejection
;
the idea of such freedom transported him, but
the thought of his own political relations soon
subdued
and saddened his spirit. He struck his hand
despondingly upon a pile of manuscripts, the
publication
of which the censors had prohibited, on the
ground of their liberality of sentiment. Pacing the
room, and exclaiming enthusiastically at my
descriptions
,
the poor bard seemed ready to throw himself
into the first vessel which could convey him from a
land so favourable to the inspiration, and inimical to
the development of the divine art. I was interested
in the expedient he had adopted to gratify his
restricted muse. He was deep in the study of
Natural
History, and was devoting himself to the
poetical
illustration of this subject, reserving visions of
liberty for the especial subjects of his
unwritten
poetry. Upon parting, I gave him a volume of
selections from Byron, as he was studying the
English
tongue: he pressed the
bello regalo
to his
heart, and promising to write, embraced me, and we
parted.
MODERN ITALY.
We admire thee now
As we admire the beautiful in death.
But why despair? Twice hast thou lived already;
Twice shone among the nations of the world
As the sun shines among the lesser lights
Of heaven; and shalt again.
The
manners and morals of Italy, like the same
characteristics of other countries, are sometimes
condemned
,
without discrimination, even by intelligent
as well as virtuous men. Yet not only should the
general fact, that the intercourse of travellers is
usually
limited to the extreme exemplars of the
population
of a country, be kept in view, in judging of
character in Italy; let it be also borne in mind that the
choicest spirits of a nation, in such a political
condition
,
are often found only in the shades of retirement
at home, or enduring voluntary exile in a foreign
land. `Character,' says a distinguished authoress
`is an instinct; it is more allied with nature than the
understanding; and yet circumstances alone give men
the opportunity of developing it.' And to the
sojourner
in Italy, who marks the unfolding of this
instinct, where it is most truly and natively
developed
,
in that inner tabernacle of life which we
call
home
, will be revealed such qualities of
humanity
as are rarely, if ever, known in equal
freshness
and beauty. The modern Italian character is
far more intimately associated, in my mind, with
the memory of acts and sympathies of rare urbanity
and friendliness, than with the by-way specimens
of imposition and mendicity, with which travellers
seem to delight in interlarding their journals. He
who, in estimating character, attaches due
importance
to what have been philosophically denominated
the
affective
powers, will scarcely dwell
despairingly
upon the characteristics even of the present
inhabitants of Italy. They are, in truth, the
children
of feeling. And hence we find the uneducated
peasantry and artisans appreciating and relishing,
often most enthusiastically, the poetry and music of
their country. The modification of Petrarch's
sonnets
,
and their becoming popular simply in an oral
form, is a phenomenon explicable only on the ground
of a national taste and enthusiasm. Nor have these
general features ceased to be. Although `silent
rows the songless gondolier,' the stanzas of Tasso
are not forgotten in Venice, nor does Ariosto cease
to amuse the crowd on the Mole at Naples. If,
therefore, one who mixes with the multitude,
adapting
himself sufficiently to their temperament and
modes of expression, who goes with them to the
opera and the festival, and, especially, is brought
near them in the family, fails to discover and feel
a remarkable degree of the pure spirit of human
brotherhood, such as shall impress his heart and win
him from his prejudices, we think his experience
must be singularly unfortunate.
Certain it is, indeed, that the intellectual charms,
the religious graces, the native modesty, which are
the glory of the American female character, are
sometimes wanting; and yet, in frequent instances,
one cannot but feel baffled in an attempt to point
out their opposites. There is often a rich and
perfect
susceptibility without any great depth of
sentiment
;
there is a spirit of affectionate kindness, but
its extension is seemingly a kind of constitutional
habit; there is a pride without true dignity, and an
open, playful, genuine nature, which yet we are
almost
persuaded, but for undoubted evidence, to brand
as habitual affectation. Let one imagine loveliness
combined with unrestrained and unrestrainable
spirit
,
illumined with passionate feeling, and seconded
by a language whose very accents are poetic, and a
manner frank, and from its intrinsic peculiarities,
interesting, and he may have a faint conception of
an Italian beauty. Let him portray to himself a
vivid and restless imagination, over whose
magic-working
energies no moral control presides, and into
whose brilliant images no meditative colouring
enters
,
an intellect too active and inconstant for intense
or elevated action, a heart exquisitely alive to every
faint impression of sympathy and love; in a word, a
S
spirit ardent, unchastened by the perfect sentiment
of religion, unnerved by the holy sinews of
christian
principle, and yet glowing, restless and
energetic
,
and he may arrive at an inadequate but not
incorrect idea of a species of female character in
Italy.
General manners and morals are, indeed,
proverbially
too loose, not to merit the condemnation of
the just observer. How far this is ascribable to the
political and physical peculiarities of the country,
an unprejudiced man cannot easily declare, while
candour compels him to confess that these palliating
causes exist. I have remarked, as a striking proof
of the want of intellectual resources among the
Italians
,
their sympathy for one who, from choice or
necessity, is even temporarily solitary. And the
importance which the mere conventional acts of life,
and the occasional intervention of amusement, have
acquired in their estimation, evinces the mournful
absence of more worthy and truly valuable
employments
both for the time and intellect.
Let it ever be remembered, in view of the present
moral and social condition of Italy, how early the
`fatal gift of beauty' provoked those predatory
incursions
which have so despoiled her shores, and
neutralized her nationality. How often have the
glittering ranks of an invading host gleamed, like a
meteor of ill omen, amid the mists of that mountain
barrier, which nature has interposed between her
favourite land and the surrounding nations!
The history of Italy, in the middle ages, is a detail
of successive contests, internal and foreign, the only
result of which seems to have been the settling down
of the political being of the whole country into a
kind of hydra-despotisma government shared by
foreign princes, ecclesiastical rulers, the inhabitants
(and their representatives) of the several states.
During the long twenty years of Napoleon's
domination
,
whether enduring the horrors of famine in
besieged
Genoa, sacrificing to the Moloch of war upon
the plains of Lombardy, or sending the flower of
her army to perish amid Russian snows, she was
courting martyrdom only to secure a change of
masters
,
or minister to the ambition of the ascendant.
It is perhaps impossible for a visitor of the present
day, to realize that this land has indeed been the
scene of such constant, severe, and unsuccessful
warfare
.
The peace which has been enjoyed by other
countries of the globea peace no less fruitful of
general prosperity and general intellectual growth,
than void of the ever active causes of commotion
with such a tranquillity Italy seems never to have
been blessed.
There are, indeed, few problems more difficult to
solve satisfactorily than the prospects of this
country
,
as regards its vital interests. The several states,
if united and penetrated by a just revolutionary
sentiment, would advance towards independence as
rapidly and certainly as the moral circumstances of
the people would permit. But this is very far from
the case, as the experience of the past and the
aspect of the present most clearly indicate. There
is Austria, on one side, jealous of her foothold in
this devoted land, and, perhaps, of all their political
sufferings, none is more galling to the Italians, than
the insulting presence of Austrian soldiery, an evil
which the Pope, as a measure of self-defence, is
continually
encouraging. Then the corroding internal
divisions, which seem stronger and more baneful in
proportion to the motives for union, are an awful
barrier to the enfranchisement of the whole country.
Such, too, is the power of the priesthood, and their
influence over the women, that through them the
existence of any liberal sentiment is almost
immediately
made known, and its extension prevented.
Indeed, this mutual conspiracy, for, viewed in
reference
to its operation, it merits no lighter name,
between the two classes of community from which,
according to nature and truth, the chief purifying
influence
should proceed, constitutes the spring which
embitters and undermines all excellence, individual
and political.
But a deeper cause, and one involving every
other, is discoverable in the want of intelligence
and moral sentiment among the people. In short,
while the liberalizing spirit and improving
influences
of the age, have to some extent become
diffused
in Italy, while we see distinct indications of
the decline of ecclesiastical power and ignorant
superstition
,
and hear of the King of Naples visiting
the English and French courts to gain experience
in the art of good government, we cannot but feel
that Italy is not yet virtuous enough to maintain the
forms or evolve the moral glory of genuine national
freedom.
There are times when the American visitor is
simultaneously impressed with the social and moral
pre-eminence of his native land and the local
attractions
of this; and is thus led to think of them in
comparison with each other. In such a view it is
impossible to lose sight of the several causes which
have combined to form the present moral
atmosphere
and intellectual spirit of the two countries.
In Italy, ages of barbarism and warfare, gradually
changing to a more refined existence, produced a
brilliant period of chivalry and art, and then, amid
despotic influences, acting upon a national
constitution
,
and in a country peculiarly exposed to their
worst effects, brought in the present form of society.
With us the bracing air of freedom, alive with the
higher impulses to action, teeming with moral
motive
,
elevating knowledge and religious enthusiasm,
naturally created a moral constitution presenting
almost
a complete contrast. What cause for wonder,
if, destitute of a free arena, the ambition of a young
Italian of the present day is merged in a frivolous
passion for amusement? If, when the sublime
motive
of a national spirit is wanting, men think within
S 2
the narrowest circle of human sympathies? If the
women, looked upon as the victims, and not aspired
to as the honours of the other sex, cease to value the
virtues which are their highest, but most
unappreciated
ornaments?
THE LAST SOJOURN.
And now farewell to Italyperhaps
Forever! Yet, methinks, I could not go,
I could not leave it, were it mine to say
Farewell forever!
Milano
! why is thy very name suggestive of so
many and such affecting associations? The
luxuriance
and fertility amid which Napoli is reared, the
mellow air of antiquity that broods over the Eternal
city, Firenze's picturesque beauty, Venezia's unique
aspectthese attractions are not thine. Assuredly
in thy sister cities there is more to interest, more to
admire, more to delight a retrospective ideality.
True, at the coming on of evening, one may gaze
unweariedly upon the equipages of thy nobility and
the beauty of thy daughters, as they pass in dazzling
succession along the Corso, and wonder not that
thy modern conqueror called thee his second Paris.
True, thy splendid marmoreal cathedral, with its
clustering spires, its countless statuary adornments,
its magnificent proportions and Gothic solemnity
true, thy cathedral is a tabernacle wherein to linger,
rejoice and
feel;
and the richly-wrought chapel
beneath
,
with the corse of Carlo Borromeo, in its
crystal
coffin, is a marvellously gorgeous sepulchre, and
the broad white roof above, whence the eye glances
over the blue range of distant mountains and verdant
plains of Lombardy, is no ordinary observatory.
And then, again, one who loves to lose himself in
mystic musings, may stand in the bare and deserted
refectory of
Santa Maria della Grazia
, and ponder
the mouldering remnant of Leonardo's genius,
tracing the fretted outlines of the forms and faces
revered, that are clustered around the `Last Supper;'
and if it rejoice one to behold the very poetry of
physical life radiated from inanimate matter, he may
note the sinewy forms, nervous limbs, distended
nostrils, and arching necks of the bronze steeds at the
Simplon Gate; ay, and one may beguile an hour at
the Gallery of Art, were it only in perusing the
countenance of Hagar, as she turns away from her
home at the bidding of Abraham, as depicted by the
pencil of Guercino; or study the relics preserved
in the Ambrosian Library; or sit, on a festa day,
beneath
the spreading chestnuts of the public gardens,
surrounded by fair forms and gay costumes, while
the air is rife with the inspiring instrumental
harmony
of the Austrian band. But is it the memory
of such ministrations alone that makes the thought
of thee, Milano, what it is to me? No: I revert with
fondness to thy level precincts and mountain-bound
environs, because there the air of Italia was last
inhaledthere her melody died away upon my ear
there was my last sojourn in Italy.
The lapse of a few hours in Milan, sufficed to
indicate that something unusual was occupying and
interesting the public mind. The
caffs
echoed the
tones of earnest discussion; shrugs, nods, and
expressive
gesticulations were lavished with even more
than Italian prodigality; dark eyes beamed with
expectancy; the favoured votaries of amusement
had something like a business air about them; the
tradesmen loitered longer in by-way converse; the
journals teemed with eloquent and controversial
articles
;
pamphlets were distributed, and placards
posted. You might have deemed that the period so
vividly described by Manzoni when the Milanese
were agitated by the factions which contended so
long and warmly, years gone by, about the price
of bread, had returned, but that the prevailing
language of the present popular feeling was that of
pleasureof enthusiasm, rather than passionof
common anticipation, rather than discordant
interests
.
An American might have augured, from the
signs of the time, that a strongly contested election
was proceeding; and a Parisian would probably have
discerned the incipient elements of a revolution; but
the cause of the excitement was such as could
produce
similar visible effects no where but in Italy;
and no one but an Italian, or a familiar denizen of
the land, could perfectly appreciate the phenomena.
The title-page of one of the newly issued
publications
reveals the ostensible circumstance which is at
the bottom of the social agitation; `
La Malibran
Milano
'yes, the renowned Malibran had been
unexpectedly engaged to give three representations
of an opera, in which Pasta---the beloved of the
Milanese
,
had been performing with what they deemed
inimitable excellence. Long before the period
designated
,
the boxes of the Scala were secured; and
many an ardent sojourner, and unprovided native,
anxiously awaited the period when the other parts
of the house would be thrown open for general and
indiscriminate appropriation.
When at length the eventful evening arrived, the
descending chandelier revealed an impatient
multitude
that, five hours previous, had taken possession of
the
parterre
. Maria Louisa was a prominent
occupant
of the court box; and Pasta, in the intense
interest
of the occasion, leaned over and followed with a
keen gaze, the form of her rival, till it disappeared
behind the scenes. Throughout the brilliant
assemblage
,
convened in that splendid edifice, there was
alternately profound silence or resounding
acclamations
;
and five times, at the close, did the
bravissima
donina
obey the call, and come forth to receive
their rapturous plaudits. It was with a melancholy
emotion, almost oppressive, that I remembered, on
leaving the house, at the close of the last evening,
that for me this beautiful magic was to cease. I felt
that harmony, such as never before blessed my ears,
was to enliven me no more; that, like a summer
breeze, it had borne its cool refreshment, it had
wafted its odorous perfume, it had awakened its
note upon the harp of the spirit, and had flown on
to cheer some other and more distant sojourner.
Awhile before the Diligence started, I once more
entered the cathedral. The noon-day sun was
streaming
through the stained glass of the windows, and a
few priests were chanting at the altar. Scating myself
beneath one of the lofty arches, and viewing again
the gothic grandeur and rich tressil-work around
me, I yielded to the overwhelming reveries of the
hour. I could not but feel that a few days of rapid
movement would take me, perhaps forever, from a
land which had calmly but deeply ministered to my
happiness, and gradually but surely gained upon my
love. There was an earnest reluctance, a rebellion
of the strong desires, a painful intermission in the
cherished train of emotion, at this renouncement of
objects endeared by taste and habit. But especially
did my thoughts cling sadly and tenaciously around
what previous ideas and native sentiment had
prepared
me most readily and fervently to love
humanity
.
I felt that if the social activity and
predominance
of mental endeavour which characterize
my own country were wanting here, yet that I had
known and experienced much of the true spirit of
fraternity, much of intellectual enthusiasm and
generous
sentiment. I thought of the many hours of
quiet and innocent enjoyment, the instances of social
kindness, the offices of sympathy, and the
spiritstirring
song, which had each and all opened
fountains
of living joy in a young but anxious breast. I
realized in this hour of parting, how near and dear
the scenes and gratifications of Italy were to my
heart. The moral weaknesses and errors of the land
were not, indeed, absent from my mind; but, with
the thought of them, came also that of their causes,
their palliations, and hopes for their subjugation
under
auspices fitted to cherish and develope the talent
and feeling worthy of human nature.
At about mid-day we departed, and were rapidly
carried along the rich plains, looking greener and
more fertile as we approached their termination.
Towards dusk the mountains rose sublimely in the
distance, and the beautiful and still surface of Lago
Maggiore was brilliantly revealed in the light of a
full moon; this landscape, indeed, feasted our eyes
during the early part of the night's ride, and fled
only when the broken slumbers obtainable in a
Diligence
,
veiled or rendered introspective our visions.
On leaving Domo d'Ossola, a scene was presented
in every respect a contrast with what the preceding
day's ride had displayed. Rugged mountains,
snow-capt
and rock-bound, now rising abruptly, and now
gradually declining, here unclothed with aught
umbrageous
,
there supporting the clinging firs,
sometimes
moist with dripping springs, and at others,
exhibiting a dry unbroken surface of granite. The
cold bleak points, hoary with snow, were ever above
us, the murmuring of falling water continually
audible
,
and some new combination of crude and
aspiring
mountain, winding vale and chainless rock,
ever and anon, attracting the eye. Attention, too,
was often and irresistibly withdrawn from this
chaotic
scenery to the immense product of human art,
of which we were so securely availing ourselves.
The precipices on either side, the rough-hewn
grottoes
through which we passed, the ever-varying and
yet ever wild and solitary aspect of all around,
evidenced
that we were upon the Simplon. For some
time after the moon had again arisen, the foaming
waters of the Rhone were seen glancing like molten
silver in her beams. After leaving Martigny, the
Pissevache fall was in view; its misty and graceful
form, even at that early hour, crowned with rainbow
hues; and beyond St. Maurice, another beautiful
object appeareda long fleecy cloud, resting,
spirit-like
,
upon the centre brow of a lofty mountain. Ere
long, the broad and blue waters of Leman were in
sight, and our course lay along its shore, by the
castle of Chillon, and the villages of Vivey and
Lausanne. From the succeeding dawn until our
arrival at Geneva, we were riding in view of the
lake, rich and flower-decked meadows, beautiful
villas
,
and far-away, white and towering, the `awful and
sovran Blanc' met the eye, to kindle imaginative
visions of grandeur; to transport the beholder into
the beautiful valley at its base, within hearing of its
water-falls, and full in view of its congregated
sublimity
.
So magic-like did the versatile and effective
images collect and pass upon the mind's camera,
that it was not until the contrasted and
magnificent
insignia of Switzerland thus completely
environed us, and the impressions thence derived
became continuous and absorbing, that I felt that
the staff of my pilgrimage was indeed reassumed,
and my sojourn in Italy ended.
CONCLUSION.
Thou fortunate region! whose greatness inured,
Awoke to new life from its ashes and dust;
Twice glorified fields! if in sadness I turned
From your infinite marvels, the sadness was just.
To many individuals, perhaps, the imaginative, the
purely intellectual character of the enjoyments which
attention and susceptibility may extract from the
scenes and agencies of Italy, is an objection. These
characteristics are, indeed, at war with the
ultra-utilitarian
spirit of the age. Yet there is a vastness in
that source of happiness denominated the
ideal
, of
which such cavillers are unaware.
Notwithstanding
the capacity of suffering involved in a sensibility
to this moral incitement, life would be almost bereft
of interest were the fountains of imaginative
enjoyment
sealed to mortals. We know not, nor under
the present condition of being can we know, how
delicately, yet universally, sentiment mingles with
and marks every pleasure of existence. Its
commonest
incidents, its familiar routine, not less than
its exalted offices, insensibly imbibe and radiate a
spiritual colouringan interest not their own, in
which consists the true secret of the delight they
afford.
There are few countries better calculated to
nourish and bring out the latent
ideal
of existence
than this, although here, as every where, its
expansion
must be aided. The great intellectual tendency
of the legitimate influences of Italy is, indeed, to
maintain the supremacy of taste, and to quicken the
action of the sentiments. In younger and more
agitated
communities, there is much to excite a
vigilant
habit of observation, and develope native
intelligence
;
and in scenes less environed by associations
of almost universal interest, through a spirit of
ambition
or the bustling zeal of general enterprise, the
mental powers are variously and often vigorously
unfolded. But in this, the absence of all occasion
of immediate excitement from the agitation of any
one of the great elements of society, and the
comparatively
narrow circle in which the machinery of
commerce and government move, are circumstances
which serve to exhibit in broad relief those more
intimate
relations, and less conventional, and therefore
more interesting influences, with which human
society
abounds.
One is singularly uninterrupted in the endeavour
to brighten into poetry the pathway of his being.
He is undisturbed, nay, he is not unfrequently
encouraged
by the atmosphere in which he lives.
Tranquillity of positionthat pre-requisite to the
enjoyment of a poetical temperamentclears the
way, and beautiful forms in nature, glorious
productions
of art, a passionate social character,
time-hallowed
associations, a melodious language and the
teeming presence of musical influences, are about
him to feed the flame of that enthusiasm which
idealizes, and therefore enriches human nature.
There is, surely, ground for moral satisfaction in
thus scanning, under the excitement of sympathy,
the present scenes and intellectual influences of
Italy. We stand among her ruins, eloquent of
past greatness, and instinctively gaze around for a
lingering ray of existing glory; we contemplate
with impatient sadness, her palsied political being,
and yearn to lose its memory in dwelling upon the
tokens of mental prowess and imaginative
expansion
;
and these we find in the beauty and perfection
of her literature and art. There is something
singularly
consolatory, in thus tracing out a
conservative
principle from amid the insignia of decay and
prostration. There is something quickening to the
love of humanity, something which renews our faith
in her progressive tendencies, in beholding the
continuance
,
and feeling the power of an intellectual
dominion, a heritage of mind, an empire over the
heart, where the more external sway of the political
sceptre has been most sadly subverted.
THE END.