HISTORY.
THE NARRATICON—LOOKING UP.
I stood, methought, betwixt earth, seas and skies;
The whole creation open to my eyes:
In air, self-balanced, hung the globe below,
Where mountains rise, and circling oceans flow;
Here naked rocks and empty wastes were seen,
There, tow'ry cities, and the forests green:
Here sailing ships delight the wand'ring eyes;
There trees and intermingled temples rise:
Now a clear sun the shining scene displays,
Finds NARRATICON brightest 'neath his rays.
—Pope.
CHAP. I.
GIVES some description of the country lying about, and bordering upon the NARRATICON.—Character of the Natives.—Their condition before the Great Exploring Expedition of 1866.
IN THE heart of the great State of Jersey, far remote from the noise and bustle of Commerce, where the tasseled corn plays gently in the Southern breeze, and the purple
 fox-grape grows luscious 'neath a southern sun, sparkles the NARRATICON.
Its golden water ripples over graveled beaches; kisses meekly the feet of the cold gray bluffs; runs laughingly beneath the overhanging larches; plays gentle music on the grassy slopes; darkens beneath the shadows of the wooded hills; and hides its sparkles in the cool, deep coves.
Its banks are green with life. The placid lake lends health and vigor to the noble trees that seem to bend their arms to softly touch its silver surface. Its waters teem with merry members of the finny tribe; for, 'midst the clustering lilies, sports the minnow; here and there the sun-fish darts, and then his sides flash crystal in the noon-day sun; while, lord of all, the solemn old Pahdunkie, 'neath a stone, lies watching with a jealous eye, the lazy polly-wog. (
a
)
The sky-lark, shrilly pipng out his morning song, is mirrored in its depths. The blackbird, at the scorching noon, comes chirping to the cool shade of its wooded bank; and when the hovering shadows of the night creep down upon its peaceful surface, then the heron's mournful note is echoed from the deep, dark coves, where he has made his home.
How many suns have smiled on Narraticon, none can tell. (
b
)
Years before the white man's tread was heard within its forests, the mild-eyed deer has waded in its cooling streams. Oft has the Indian maiden, pensive, gazed as if to penetrate its depths, and seen her own sweet face reflected back. The growling bear has lapped a cooling draught; and grim old braves have laved their feet in Narraticon's waters.
Prior to the Great Exploring Expedition of 1866, the condition of the natives, was truly distressing. They lived principally upon fish and berries, roaming up and down its banks, in clans, and acknowledging neither law nor restraint.
Sometimes they were peacefully inclined; and then, at other periods, they would break out in a lawless warfare against all civilization. [
c
]
Their ignorance was pitiable indeed. One of the prominent aborigines was known to ask $20. for a leaky old canoe, and still
 despite all opposing arguments, persisted in his idea that a solid gold watch, could be bought for Fifty Cents!!
Many were seen with beards descending far below their waists, while some were clothed in merely a jacket and a cap.
Their mode of warfare was curious, original and effective. [
d
] Their toes were armed with sharp, strong nails, and screaming out a loud "U-HALL!" they would button their jackets tightly about their breasts, balance themselves upon their heads, and dash their toes, violently, into their opponent; who, if unluckily standing on his feet, would receive the murderous attack in his face.
DENIZENS OF THE DEEP.
Their mode of fishing was truly ingenious. A glow-worm impaled upon a sharp stick, entices the stately Pahdunkie from his bed among the reeds; and as he opens his wide jaws, to take in the delicious morsel, the fisherman's toe is thrust within his mouth, and in an instant, the mighty fish lies on the green sward, gasping his life away.
Their fire they procured by the primitive method of ignition by friction; and, after rubbing two sticks together for the space of two hours, obtained the desired spark. For the benefit of their weaker-armed brethren, an enterprising tribe kept one hundred captives rubbing, night and day, two large trees together; and, from the sparks produced by the abrasion, any one was privileged to light his pipe, on the payment of a Pahdunkie's eye,—a shilling among these curious people.
Among the most famous of their dishes, may be mentioned a sort of minced-meat of bull-frogs' beads and turtles' legs, saturated with snakes' blood, and stuffed in an old cel-skin. It is then buried in a moist soil for two weeks; when baked it is eaten with raspberries, and pronounced extremely good, having a flavor like strong cheese, or asafoetida.
Another, far more common than this, and one which the Author will long remember as most grateful to the palate, was broiled Pahdunkie, stuffed with a salad of nicely prepared Jamestown weed, (provincially "jimson,") grasshoppers, robins' ergs, and mud. [
e
[
Thus these wonderful people lived, when the Great Expedition of 1866 broke in upon their barbarous habits, and caused them to scatter into the surrounding country. [
f
]
CHAP. II.
An account of the first attempt to explore the Lake, in the early part of August, 1866.—Difficulties that met the effort.—Its failure.—All that transpired up to August 8th.
IN the early part of August, 1866, the arrival, in Swedesboro', of Messrs. Allen and Cook, revived the flagging interest, felt by the citizens, to know something about the people inhabiting the shores of the mysterious sheet of water, that lay so near their town Emboldened by the encouraging promises of the citizens, Messrs. Allen and Cook conceived the bold project of an exploration. Their determination was no sooner made public, than they were the recipients of the most flattering offers of aid.
Mrs. Ira Allen generously donated provisions for a two-day's cruise.
Mr Ira Allen loaned implements for digging. [
g
]
Mr. C. S. Westcott, of Phila, furnished valuable suggestions for navigating.
Mr. William Black nullified his EDICT against trespassing, so far as to allow the Expedition to pass through his possessions.
Mr Charles Paulus offered his services as scout.
A. Grizzly Esq. kindly furnished a craft, suitable for navigating; while to Mr. J. Keen, of Swedesboro, the explorers were greatly indebted for data, and traditional lore.
After careful preparation, early on the morning of the 8th of August, every detail had been looked to, most carefully, and all was announced as ready for the start.
The beautiful craft, the "Jolly Polly," gaily dressed in flags, and manned by Lieut. Puddles with a stalwart crew, lay bathed in the morning sun, upon the bosom of the heauteous Narraticon.
At 10 min. past 7 A. M., the word was given to dip oars; and amid the loud huzzas of the citizens, and the soul-inspiring strain
 of "Hail Columbia," these brave-hearted men started out upon their perilous mission.
THE START.
They crept slowly up the western bank, and beheld, for the first time, the varied scenery of wood and dell, cove and beach, for which Narraticon is so noted.
Absorbed in contemplating the beauties of the scene about them, they were startled from their 
 dream of happiness by the sudden snapping of a thole-pin, which threw Capt. Cook into the bottom of the boat, and the whole crew into consternation.
This accident occurred near the THREE BUTTES. Finding it impossible to remedy the unlooked-for mishap, they landed; and, on discovering a spring, proceeded to encamp, [
h
]
All hopes of going further, on this day, were at once abandoned. Moreover, the crew becoming dissatisfied with the division of the provisions, the officers thought it best to retrace their course; and, shortly after 10 o'clock, they embarked for home. [
i
]
Thus was the first effort to explore Narraticon, frustrated, and the Expedition, that had started under the most favorable auspices at 7 o'clock, returned, the same day, in time for dinner.
CHAP. III.
THE period after the failure of the 1st Expedition, to the 2nd.—The 2nd Expedition.—Discoveric made.—Explocation of Battenton Branch.—Serious accident.—Return of Expedition.
THE failure of the Expedition of August 8th caused a feeling of gloom to spread over the whole scientific community. So much had been expected from the explorations that its failure could hardly be credited. Both Allen
 and Cook were subjected to much undeserved censure; while the crew and Lieut. Puddles were openly accused of mutiny. Such was the condition of affairs until Aug. 22nd, when these brave-hearted men, despite public opinion and their past failure, determined to again visit the mysterious Narraticon. [
j
]
About noon on the 22nd, without any demonstrations from the citizens, they set sail, following nearly the same course as before. They passed the First and Second Willows, skirting close beside the Three Buttes,—the scene of their former mishap,—and silently proceeded up the coast.
They soon arrived at Doctor's Point, and, landing, held a council upon its bold promontory.
It was here decided to proceed up the Northern Coast of Battentown Branch, and explore the hidden wonders of its upper waters.
Embarking, they proceeded slowly along the shore; watching closely for hidden snags, and the fierce natives, who were said to roam the bleak summits of Doctor's Bluffs. [
k
]
Meeting with no accident, and perceiving no natives, they soon reached the head of the Brauch. Here, a party under Allen landed, and moved cautiously inland.
They discovered Davidson's Creek, which empties into the Branch, near their landing; along its moist shores the first traces of the natives were discovered.
TRACES OF THE NATIVES
Being unprepared to meet them in any force, and finding the traces increasing in number, Allen concluded to retreat to the boat. [
l
]
Setting sail, they skirted the head of the Branch to the Southern shore, and turning eastward, proceeded to follow its beautiful windings.
They had already left the wooded tops of Jimmie's Hills behind them, and were rapidly nearing
 the mouth of the Branch, when the sudden careening of the boat threw overboard a valuable and very important Hatchet, belonging to Ira Allen Esq. of Swedesboro. (
m
)
This sudden occurrence for the moment, paralyzed the crew. A hurried consultation was held and it was determined that, under the circumstances, the farther exploration on that day would, indeed, be unadvisable. With saddened faces, the crew turned the prow of the "Jolly Polly" homeward.
Thus was the Second, like the First attempt, ruined by a sudden freak of fortune. The hidden mysteries of the Upper Narraticon were still concealed from civilization and mankind.
Virtually, the Second Expedition was not a failure. A large sweep of coast had been explored, traces of the natives were discovered, the mouth of Davidson's Creek was undeniably located and the exact position of Jimmie's Hills was defined.
Still, in the face of all these triumphs, we are sorry here to record that the citizens refused farther aid to these intrepid explorers. And they were obliged, under the force of this difficulty, to curb their impatience to reach the head-waters of the Narraticon, and remain inactive.
CHAP. IV.
DETERMINATION of Allen and Cook to explore the NARRATICON alone.—Protest of the crew and Lieut. Puddles.—The Departure.—Success of the project.—Discoveries made.—Safe return.
THIS was the condition of affairs up to Aug. 23rd, when, influenced by the earnest wishes of a few true and trusted friends, Messrs Allen and Cook conceived the bold project of an exploration alone.
This proposition was met with one universal cry of disapprobation from their gallant command. Lieut. Puddles shed tears of vexation at the resolution of his
 beloved commanders, and asked but a chance to share the perils of the Expedition.
Alike deaf to the entreaties of their devoted crew, and the scoffs of the citizens, these intrepid explorers spent their time in careful preparation for their meditated voyage. On the morning of the 23rd all was announced as ready for the start Accompanied to the water's edge by the crew, a few friends and Lieut. Puddles, they embarked.
Proceeding slowly up the western coast, they passed, for the third time, the Three Buttes, steering thence for Doctor's Point. This, after some time, they reached, and landing, crected a flag.
Embarking again, they pushed off, and going to the head of the Branch, landed and crected another station, near the mouth of Davidson's Creek. They then started down the southern coast, passed Jimmie's Hills, and neared, with thoughtful hearts, the spot where the Hatchet had been lost. Landing, they proceeded to crect a Monument. (
n
) At this point too, a station was fixed; and from it, across the Branch, might be descried the bleak summits of Doctor's Bluffs.
THE MONUMENT.
Setting sail, they rounded the Point into the main waters of the NARRATICON, and with stout hearts ventured to explore that wide expanse of mysterious waste.
Suddenly passing the bold promontory of Kingfisher's Roost, they beheld, for the first time, the sweep of Swedesboro' Bay.
Rapidly crossing its wide mouth and following the windings of the shore beyond its southern boundary, they plunged quickly into the overhanging shadows of Perch Nook.
Leaving its cosy precincts behind them, and rounding the
 jutting headland beyond, the explorers glided silently into the still waters of Pocket Bay.
Here a scene of tranquil nature met their view. The struggling sunbeams scarce could force a passage through the thick foliage of the overhanging willows. Gentle breezes drew rustling music from the quivering leaves, but scarcely rippled the glassy surface of the cool, deep cove.
Nourished by the pearly waters of a murmuring brook, the grass grew tall and green above the treacherous quicksands on its shores.
The brush and undergrowth was thick and strong, and served a screen to hide from day the still, deep pools, extending inland, that are the homes of frogs and tender polly-wogs.
With noiseless oars our navigators cautiously stole away from its drowsy limits, and weathering Nelladnakooc Point, bore straight across the wide sweep of water between them and a jutting headland far beyond. Gaining this, they landed; crecting a tall flagstaff, they called the spot Range Station.
Embarking, they struck boldly out for the middle of the Lake, passing Cape Lookout far to the westward, and proceeding rapidly forward, until, arriving nearly opposite Heron's Perch, the navigation became, suddenly, very dangerous.
Hidden snags seemed to threaten the destruction of their noble craft, and frequent shoals proclaimed to the hardy explorers that they were rapidly nearing the goal of their ambition—the HEAD OF THE NARRATICON.
Before them lay a low, sandy island; while, far beyond, arose the wooded hills of Meley's Possessions. To the eastward was a thick, impenetrable forest: in the west a meandering creek lost itself in the green meadows.
Landing on the island, our explorers looked about them and discovered many very interesting relies of antiquity.
DISCOVERY OF THE RELICS.
Among the most valuable of these, may be noticed a sapling, placed horizontally upon two uprights, along the bank of the creek. Upon this, no doubt, long ago the Indian braves have sat, while washing their war 
 the cool waters that flow beneath it. [
p
]
After making these investigations they proceeded to crect a huge Tripod, upon which they unfurled their flag.
Its symbol so inspired them that they determined to explore the creek. For this purpose a 
 channel across the island was cut; but it being late in the afternoon, upon its completion they determined to abandon the enterprise for the present.
They then took formal possession of the land, under the name of Tripod Island, and called the channel they had made, Allen's Cut.
Embarking, they steered for the eastern coast, striking it in the immediate vicinity of Buzzard's Delight. Keeping close in shore, they passed Grizzly's Retreat at about 3. P. M.
For some distance the coast was low and undulating. Then the steep sides of Shaky Hills arose to view, and from it to Noodles' Beach the land is singularly precipitous (
q
)
Skirting close Point Puddles, they were gently wafted round it to where an abrupt receding of the coast formed a beautiful bay, protected on the north by a jutting headland.
Landing here, they partook of 
 the delicate fox-grape, pendent in luxuriant clusters a mid the thick-entangled branches.
After the repast they named
 the bay, Cook's Cove; calling the highland, Allen's Point. Again setting sail, they soon passed the snug limits of Catfish Hollow.
Suddenly rounding Cape Charlie, they caught but a passing glance of Mike's Cove Sailing beneath the shadow of a majestic sweet gum tree, they struck holdly across the noble sweep of Expanse Bay (
r
)
A few minutes' sail, and the glistening scintillations of Gill's Gravel struck their eyes. A few moments more and they stood upon the bold promontory known as Garwood's Point.
What a beautiful vision burst upon the view of these two weary navigators!
Far to the westward stretched the endless waters of the Branch; along its southern shore arose the dizzy heights of Jimmie's Hills. Still farther to the south ran the receding shores of Swedesboro' Bay. Here were the purple waters of the Expanse; while there, before them, flashed the glittering wave of glorious Narraticon! Across it rose the gray fronts of Doctor's Bluffs.
Gazing in speechless admiration, how difficult to tear themselves from the scene! At length they embarked, and proceeding rapidly homeward, landed at the Maple at about 4 P. M (
s
)
Their arrival was immediately made known throughout the village, and a deputation of the most influential citizens, headed by Lieut. Puddles, received our careworn navigators.
THE GLORIOUS RETURN.
Thus was the great Narraticon explored; and the men, who in the morning had departed amid the jeers of the populace, returned to be welcomed by their very scoffers. [
t
]
CHAP. V.
EXPEDITION of Lieutenant Slasher.—The natives destroy the signals—Survey by Allen of Cook in November.
NO attempt was made to extend the advantages afforded by the discoveries of the Great Expedition of 1866, until the middle of September, when Lieut. Slasher, at the instance of Messrs.
 Allen and Cook, started with a party inland, towards the Branch.
His report upon the condition of affairs was exceedingly gloomy. He stated that all the stations had been demolished by the natives, as far up as Doctor's Point. The navigators feared that this cruel fate had extended to them all, yet they were still unprepared to credit Slasher's statement, that he had penetrated the forest to the head-waters, and found Tripod Station demolished.
This state of uncertainty continued until the 29th of November when our two Commanders, proceeding to survey the Lake, found evidences of the realization of their worst fears.
Every station had been destroyed. Even the tall flag-staff at Range Station was gone; and the huge Tripod had been wrenched from its fastenings, and thrown upon the ground
Despite these great inconveniences, a careful survey was made, correct soundings taken, and a map drawn, which may be relied upon, by navigators, as perfectly accurate, and the only correct delineation of Narraticon's windings extant. A copy accompanies this volume.
The Author now finds his task completed. In conclusion, he can only express his kindest thanks to those who have aided him in his work; with the trust that the Great Narraticon may never lack admirers, and that their shadows may never grow less.
In Memoriam.
