THE LECTURE.
ARTEMUS WARD.
YOU are entirely welcome ladies and gentlemen to my little picture-shop.
"
My little picture-shop
."—I have already stated that the room used was the lesser of the two on the first-floor of the Egyptian Hall. The panorama was to the left on entering, and Artemus Ward stood at the south-east corner facing the door. He had beside him a music-stand, on which for the first few days he availed himself of the assistance afforded by a sheet of foolscap on which all his "cues" were written out in a large hand. The proscenium was covered with dark cloth, and the picture bounded by a great gilt frame. On the rostrum behind the lecturer was a little door giving admission to the space behind the picture where the piano was placed. Through this door Artemus would disappear occasionally in the course of the evening, either to instruct his pianist to play a few more bars of music, to tell his assistants to roll the picture more quickly or more slowly, or to give some instructions to the man who worked "the moon." The little lecture-room was thronged nightly during the very few weeks of its being open.
I couldn't give you a very clear idea of the Mormons—and Utah—and the Plains—and the Rocky Mountains—without opening a picture-shop——and therefore I open one.
I don't expect to do great things here—but I have thought that if I could make money enough to buy me a passage to New Zealand
"
To New Zealand
."—Artemus Ward seriously contemplated a visit to Australia, after having made the tour of England. He was very much interested in all Australian affairs, had a strong desire to see the lands of the South, and looked forward to the long sea-voyage as one of the means by which he should regain his lost health.
 I should feel that I had not lived in vain.
I don't want to live in vain.——I'd rather live in Margate—or here. But
 I wish when the Egyptians built this hall they had given it a little more ventilation.
"
More ventilation
."—The heat and closeness of the densely-packed room was a cause of common complaint among the audience.
If you should be dissatisfied with anything here to-night—I will admit you all free in New Zealand—if you will come to me there for the orders. Any respectable cannibal will tell you where I live. This shows that I have a forgiving spirit.
I really don't care for money. I only travel round to see the world and to exhibit my clothes. These clothes I have on were a great success in America.
"
These clothes, etc
."—This was one of poor Artemus's jokes which owed more of its success to its oddity than to its veracity. While lecturing at the Egyptian Hall he wore a fashionably-cut dress coat in the evening. It was what he had never done during his lecture-career in the States, and he used privately to complain how uncomfortable he felt in it. He assumed the most deplorable look when pointing out his costume to his audience. His voice dropped into a moody reflective tone, and then suddenly passed into a much higher key when he commenced to allude to "large fortunes." He seemed to have shaken off the embarrassment of his fashionable clothes, and to be glad to pass on to another subject. In the punctuation of the succeeding paragraph of the lecture, I have endeavoured to convey an idea of the long pause he made between some of his sentences.
How often do large fortunes ruin young men! I should like to be ruined, but I can get on very well as I am.
I am not an Artist. I don't paint myself——though perhaps if I were a middle-aged single lady I should——yet I have a passion for pictures.——I have had a great many pictures—photographs—taken of myself. Some of them are very pretty—rather sweet to look at for a short time—and as I said before I like them. I've always loved pictures.
I could draw on wood at a very tender age When a mere child I once drew a small cartload of raw turnips over a wooden bridge.——The people of the village noticed me. I drew their attention. They said I had a future before me. Up to that time I had an idea it was behind me.
Time passed on. It always does by the way. You may possibly have noticed that Time passes on.——It is a kind of way Time has.
I became a man. I haven't distinguished myself at all as an artist—but I have always been more or less mixed up with Art. I have an uncle who takes photographs—and I have a servant who——takes anything he can get his hands on.
When I was in Rome——Rome in New York State I mean——a distinguished sculpist wanted to sculp me. But I said "No." I saw through
 the designing man. My model once in his hands—he would have flooded the market with my busts——and I couldn't stand it to see everybody going round with a bust of me. Everybody would want one of course—and wherever I should go I should meet the educated classes with my bust, taking it home to their families. This would be more than my modesty could stand——and I should have to return to America——where my creditors are.
I like Art. I admire dramatic Art—although I failed as an actor.
It was in my schoolboy days that I failed as an actor.
"
Failed as an actor
."—Artemus made many attempts as an amateur actor, but never to his own satisfaction. He was very fond of the society of actors and actresses. Their weaknesses amused him as much as their talents excited his admiration. One of his favourite sayings was that the world was made up of "men, women, and the people on the stage."
——The play was the "Ruins of pompeii
 peii."——I played the Ruins. It was not a very successful performance—but it was better than the "Burning Mountain." He was not good. He was a bad Vesuvius.
The remembrance often makes me ask—"Where are the boys of my youth?"——I assure you this is not a conundrum.——Some are amongst you here——some in America——some are in gaol.——
Hence arises a most touching question—"Where are the girls of my youth?" Some are married——some would like to be.
Oh my Maria! Alas! she married another. They frequently do. I hope she is happy—because I am.
"
Because I am!
"—Spoken with a sigh. It was a joke which always told. Artemus never failed to use it in his "Babes in the Wood" lecture, and the "Sixty Minutes in Africa," as well as in the Mormon story.
——Some people are not happy. I have noticed that.
A gentleman friend of mine came to me one day with tears in his eyes. I said "Why these weeps?" He said he had a mortgage on his farm—and wanted to borrow £200. I lent him the money—and he went away. Some time after he returned with more tears. He said he must leave me for ever. I ventured to remind him of the £200 he borrowed. He was much cut up. I thought I would not be hard upon him—so told him I would throw off one hundred pounds. He brightened—shook my hand—and said—"Old friend—I won't allow you to outdo me in liberality——I'll throw off the other hundred."
As a manager I was always rather more successful than as an actor.
Some years ago I engaged a celebrated Living American Skeleton for a tour through Australia.
 He was the thinnest man I ever saw. He was a splendid skeleton. He didn't weigh anything scarcely——and I said to myself—the people of Australia will flock to see this tremendous curiosity. It is a long voyage—as you know—from New York to Melbourne—and to my utter surprise the skeleton had no sooner got put to sea than he commenced eating in the most horrible manner. He had never been on the ocean before—and he said it agreed with him.——I thought so!——I never saw a man eat so much in my life. Beef—mutton—pork——he swallowed them all like a shark——and between meals he was often discovered behind barrels eating hard-boiled eggs. The result was that when we reached Melbourne this infamous skeleton weighed 64 pounds more than I did!
I thought I was ruined——but I wasn't. I took him on to California——another very long
 sea voyage——and when I got him to San Francisco I exhibited him as a Fat Man.
"
As a Fat Man
."—The reader need scarcely be informed that this narrative is about as real as "A. Ward's Snaiks," and about as much matter-of-fact as his journey through the States with a wax-work show.
This story hasn't anything to do with my Entertainment, I know——but one of the principal features of my Entertainment is that it contains so many things that don't have anything to do with it.
My Orchestra is small——but I am sure it is very good—so far as it goes. I give my pianist ten pounds a night—and his washing.
"
My Pianist, &c
." That a good pianist could be hired for a small sum in England was a matter of amusement to Artemus. More especially when he found a gentleman who was obliging enough to play anything he desired, such as break-downs and airs which had the most absurd relation to the scene they were used to illustrate. In the United States his pianist was desirous of playing music of a superior order, much against the consent of the lecturer.
I like Music.—I can't sing. As a singist I am not a success. I am saddest when I sing. So are those who hear me. They are sadder even than I am.
The other night some silver-voiced young men came under my window and sang—"Come where my love lies dreaming."——I didn't go. I didn't think it would be correct.
I found music very soothing when I lay ill with fever in Utah——and I was very ill——I was fearfully wasted.——My face was hewn down to nothing—and my nose was so sharp I didn't dare stick it into other people's business—for fear it would stay there—and I should never get it again. And on those dismal days a Mormon lady——she was married—tho' not so much so as her husband—he had fifteen other wives——she used to sing a ballad commencing "Sweet bird—do not fly away!"——and I told her I wouldn't.——
 She played the accordion divinely—accordionly I praised her.
I met a man in Oregon who hadn't any teeth—not a tooth in his head——yet that man could play on the bass drum better than any man I ever met.——He kept a hotel. They have queer hotels in Oregon. I remember one where they gave me a bag of oats for a pillow——I had night mares of course. In the morning the landlord said—How do you feel—old hoss—hay?——I told him I felt my oats.
"
Permit me now
." Though the serious part of the lecture was here entered upon, it was not delivered in a graver tone than that in which he had spoken the farcicalities of the prologue. Most of the prefatory matter was given with an air of earnest thought; the arms sometimes folded, and the chin resting on one hand. On the occasion of his first exhibiting the panorama at New York he used a fishing-rod to point out the picture with; subsequently he availed himself of an old umbrella. In the Egyptian Hall he used his little riding-whip.
PERMIT me now to quietly state that altho' I am here with my cap and bells I am also here with some serious descriptions of the Mormons—their manners—their customs——and while the pictures I shall present to your notice are by no means works of art—they are painted from photographs
 tographs actually taken on the spot
"
Photographs
." They were photographed by Savage and Ottinger, of Salt Lake City, the photographers to Brigham Young.
——and I am sure I need not inform any person present who was ever in the territory of Utah that they are as faithful as they could possibly be.
Curtain
. The picture was concealed from view during the first part of the lecture by a crimson curtain. This was drawn together or opened many times in the course of the lecture, and at odd points of the picture. I am not aware that Artemus himself could have explained why he caused the curtain to be drawn at one place and not at another. Probably he thought it to be one of his good jokes that it should shut in the picture just when there was no reason for its being used.
I went to Great Salt Lake City by way of California.
"
By way of California
." That is, he went by steamer from New York to Aspinwall, thence across the Isthmus of Panama by railway, and then from Panama to California by another steamboat. A journey which then occupied about three weeks.
THE STEAMER "ARIEL."
One of the United States Mail line of Steamers from New York to Aspinwall. Being a supplemental boat only, its arrangements were none of the best.
I went to California on the steamer "Ariel."——This is the steamer "Ariel."
Oblige me by calmly gazing on the steamer "Ariel"——and when you go to California be sure and go on some other steamer——because the "Ariel" isn't a very good one.
When I reached the "Ariel"—at pier No. 4—New York—I found the passengers in a state of great confusion about their things—which were being thrown around by the ship's porters in a manner at once damaging and idiotic.——So great was the excitement—my fragile form was smashed this way—and jammed that way—till
 finally I was shoved into a stateroom which was occupied by two middle-aged females—who said "Base man—leave us—O, leave us!"——I left them——Oh—I left them!
We reach Accapulco on the coast of Mexico in due time. Nothing of special interest occurred at Accapulco——only some of the Mexican ladies are very beautiful. They all have brilliant black hair——hair "black as starless night"——if I may quote from the "Family Herald." It don't curl.——A Mexican lady's hair never curls——it is straight as an Indian's. Some people's hair won't curl under any circumstances.——My hair won't curl under two shillings.
"
Under Two Shillings
." Artemus always wore his hair straight until after his severe illness in Salt Lake City. So much of it dropped off during his recovery that he became dissatisfied with the long meagre appearance his countenance presented when he surveyed it in the looking-glass. After his lecture at the Salt Lake City Theatre he did not lecture again until we had crossed the Rocky Mountains and arrived at Denver City, the capital of Colorado. On the afternoon he was to lecture there I met him coming out of an ironmonger's store with a small parcel in his hand. "I want you, old fellow," he said, "I have been all round the City for them, and I've got them at last." "Got what?" I asked. "A pair of curling-tongs. I am going to have my hair curled to lecture in to-night. I mean to cross the plains in curls. Come home with me and try to curl it for me. I don't want to go to any idiot of a barber to be laughed at." I played the part of 
friseur
. Subsequently he became his own "curlist," as he phrased it. From that day forth Artemus was a curly-haired man.
MONTGOMERY STREET, SAN FRANCISCO.
The main street of the chief city of California. It is built over what was a few years ago a portion of the Bay of San Francisco. In digging up a part of the street, some time since, the excavators came upon the hull of an old vessel full of chests of tea. The Chinaman in the foreground was pointed out by the lecturer preparatory to his remarks on the Chinese theatre.
The great thoroughfare of the imperial city of the Pacific Coast
The Chinese form a large element in the population of San Francisco—and I went to the Chinese Theatre.
A Chinese play often lasts two months. Commencing at the hero's birth, it is cheerfully conducted from week to week till he is either killed or married.
The night I was there a Chinese comic vocalist sang a Chinese comic song. It took him six weeks to finish it—but as my time was limited I went away at the expiration of 215 verses. There were 11,000 verses to this song—the chorus being "Tural lural dural, ri fol day"——which was repeated twice at the end of each verse——making—as you will at once see—the appalling number of 22,000 "tural lural dural, ri fol days"——and the man still lives.
VIRGINIA CITY, NEVADA.
When Artemus Ward paid his visit here, there was a population of about 15,000, with three daily newspapers. Five years previously it had no existence. It was the largest place between the Sierra Nevada Mountains and Salt Lake City. (1863.)
Virginia City—in the bright new State of Nevada.
"
Virginia City
." The view of Virginia City given in the panorama conveyed a very poor idea of the marvellous capital of the silver region of Nevada. Artemus caused the curtain to close up between his view of San Francisco and that of Virginia City, as a simple means of conveying an idea of the distance travelled between. To arrive at the city of silver we had to travel from San Francisco to Sacramento by steamboat, thence from Sacramento to Folsom by railroad, then by coach to Placerville. At Placerville we commenced the ascent of the Sierra Nevada, gaining the summit of Johnson's Pass about four o'clock in the morning; thence we descended; skirted the shores of Lake Tahoe, and arrived at Carson City, where Artemus lectured. From Carson, the next trip was across an arid plain, to the great silver region. Empire City, the first place we struck, was composed of about fifty wooden houses and three or four quartz mills. Leaving it behind us, we passed through the Devil's Gate—a grand ravine, with precipitous mountains on each side; then we came to Silver City, Gold Hill, and Virginia. The road was all up-hill Virginia City itself is built on a ledge cut out of the side of Mount Davidson, which rises some 9,000 feet above the sea level—the city being about half way up its side. To Artemus Ward the wild character of the scenery, the strange manners of the red-shirted citizens, and the odd developments of life met with in that uncouth mountain-town were all replete with interest. We stayed there about a week. During the time of our stay he explored every part of the place, met many old friends from the Eastern States, and formed many new acquaintances, with some of whom acquaintance ripened into warm friendship. Among the latter was Mr. Samuel L. Clemens, now well known as "Mark Twain." He was then sub-editing one of the three papers published daily in Virginia—
The Territorial Enterprise
. Artemus detected in the writings of Mark Twain the indications of great humorous power, and strongly advised the writer to seek a better field for his talents. Since then he has become a well-known New York lecturer and author. With Mark Twain, Artemus made a descent into the Gould and Curry Silver Mine at Virginia, the largest mine of the kind, I believe, in the world. The account of the descent formed a long and very amusing article in the next morning's 
Enterprise
. To wander about the town and note its strange developments occupied Artemus incessantly. I was sitting writing letters at the hotel when he came in hurriedly, and requested me to go out with him. "Come and see some joking much better than mine," said he. He led me to where one of Wells, Fargo, & Co.'s express waggons was being rapidly filled with silver bricks. Ingots of the precious metal, each almost as large as an ordinary brick, were being thrown from one man to another to load the waggon, just as bricks or cheeses are transferred from hand to had by carters in England. "Good old jokes those, Hingston. Good, solid 'Babes in the Wood,'" observed Artemus. Yet that evening he lectured in "Maguire's Opera House," Virginia City, to an audience composed chiefly of miners, and the receipts were not far short of eight hundred dollars. A droll building it was to be called an "Opera House," and to bear that designation in a place so outlandish. Perched up on the side of a mountain—from the windows of the dressing rooms—a view could be had of fifty miles of the American desert. It was an "Opera House;" yet in the plain beneath it there were Indians who still led the life of savages, and carried dried human scalps attached to their girdles. It was an "Opera House;" yet, for many hundred miles around it, Nature wore the roughest, sternest, and most barren of aspects—no tree, no grass, no shrub, but the colourless and dreary sage-brush. Every piece of timber, every brick, and every stone in that "Opera House" had been brought from California, over those snow-capped 
Sierras
, which, but a few years before had been regarded as beyond the last outposts of civilisation. Every singer who had sung, and every actor who had performed at that "Opera House" had been whirled down the sides of the Nevada mountains, clinging to the coach-top, and mentally vowing never again to trust the safety of his neck on any such professional excursion. The drama has been very plucky "out West." Thalia, Melpomene, and Euterpe become young ladies of great animal spirits, and fearless daring, when they feel the fresh breezes of the Pacific blowing in their faces. At Virginia City we purchased black felt shirts half an inch thick and grey blankets of ample size to keep us warm for the journey we were about to undertake. We invested also in revolvers to defend ourselves against the Indians; a dozen cold roast fowls to eat on the way; a demijohn of Bourbon whisky, and a bagful of unground coffee. This last was about as useful as any of our purchases. Thus provided, we started across the desert on our way to Reese River, and thence to Salt Lake City. Our coach was a fearfully lumbering old vehicle of great strength, constructed for jolting over rocky ledges, plunging into marshy swamps, and for rolling through miles of sand. The horses were small and wiry, accustomed to the country, and able to exist on anything which it is possible for a horse to eat. There were four of us in the coach. The "Pioneer Company's" man who drove us was full of whisky and good-humour when he mounted the box, and singing in chorus, "Jordan 's a hard road to travel on." we bowled down the slope of Mount Davidson towards the deserts of Nevada, 
en route
 for New Pass Station.
A wonderful little city—right in the heart of the famous Washoe silver regions——the mines of which annually produce over twenty-five millions of solid silver. This silver is melted into solid bricks—of about the size of ordinary
 house-bricks—and carted off to San Francisco with mules. The roads often swarm with these silver wagons.
One hundred and seventy-five miles to the east of this place are the Reese River Silver Mines—which are supposed to be the richest in the world.
PLAINS BETWEEN VIRGINIA & SALT LAKE.
Herbage on the plains of Nevada consists almost exclusively of the Sage-brush (Artemisia tridentata), the most dreary-looking of shrubs. The leaves are of a leaden colour, and the stems and gnarled and wiry.
The great American Desert in winter-time——the desert which is so frightfully gloomy always. No trees——no houses——no people—save the miserable beings who live in wretched huts and have charge of the horses and mules of the Overland Mail Company.
This picture is a great work of art.——It is an oil painting—done in petroleum. It is by the Old Masters. It was the last thing they did before dying. They did this and then they expired.
The most celebrated artists of London are so delighted with this picture that they come to the Hall every day to gaze at it. I wish you were nearer to it—so you could see it better. I wish I could take it to your residences and let you see
 it by daylight. Some of the greatest artists in London come here every morning before daylight with lanterns to look at. They say they never saw anything like it before——and they hope they never shall again.
When I first showed this picture in New York, the audience were so enthusiastic in their admiration of this picture that they called for the Artist——and when he appeared they threw brickbats at him.
"
Threw brickbats at him
." This portion of the panorama was very badly painted. When the idea of having a panorama was first entertained by Artemus he wished to have one of great artistic merit. Finding considerable difficulty in procuring one, and also discovering that the expense of a real work of art would be beyond his means, he resolved on having a very bad one, or one so bad in parts that its very badness would give him scope for jest. In the small towns of the Western States it passed very well for a first-class picture, but what it was really worth in an artistic point of view its owner was very well aware.
A bird's-eye-view of Great Salt Lake City——the strange city in the Desert about which so much has been heard——the city of the people who call themselves Saints.
"
Salt Lake City
." Our stay in the Mormon capital extended over six weeks. So cheerless was the place in midwinter, that we should not have stayed half that time had not Artemus Ward succumbed to an attack of typhoid fever almost as soon as we arrived. The incessant travel by night and day, the depressing effect produced by intense cold, travelling through leagues of snow and fording half-frozen rivers at midnight, the excitement of passing through Indian country, and some slight nervous apprehension of how he would be received among the Mormons, considering that be had ridiculed them in a paper published some time before, all conspired to produce the illness which resulted. Fever of the typhoid form is not uncommon in Utah. Probably the rarefaction of the air on a plateau 4,000 feet above the sea level has something to do with its frequency. Artemus's fears relative to the cordiality of his reception proved to be groundless, for during the period of his being ill he was carefully tended. Brigham Young commissioned Mr. Stenhouse, postmaster to the city and Elder of the Mormon Church, to visit him frequently and supply him with whatever he required. One of the two wives of Mr. Townsend, landlord of the Salt Lake House, the hotel where we stopped was equally as kind. Whatever the feelings of the Mormons were towards poor Artemus, they at least treated him with sympathetic hospitality. Even Mr. Porter Rockwell, who is known as one of the "Avenging Angels," or "Danite Band," and who is reported to have made away with some seventeen or eighteen enemies of the "Saints," came and sat by the bedside of the sufferer, detailing to him some of the little "difficulties" he had experienced in effectually silencing the unbelievers of times past.
I know there is much interest taken in these remarkable people—ladies and gentlemen——and
PART OF SALT LAKE CITY, VIEWED FROM A DISTANCE.
The City is laid out in squares; each house standing on an acre and a quarter of ground, with a canal of clear water flowing in front. (This picture joins on the one which follows it.)
SALT LAKE CITY, FROM THE HEIGHTS BEHIND IT.
The building in the foreground is the Mormon arsenal. To the right, in the mid-distance, is the River Jordan, flowing from Lake Utah to the Salt Lake. The valley through which the Jordan flows is one of the most fertile on the North American continent.
 I have thought it better to make the purely descriptive part of my Entertainment entirely serious.——I will not—then—for the next ten minutes—confine myself to my subject.
Some seventeen years ago a small band of Mormons—headed by Brigham Young—commenced in the present thrifty metropolis of Utah. The population of the territory of Utah is over 100,000—chiefly Mormons——and they are increasing at the rate of from five to ten thousand
 annually. The converts to Mormonism now are almost exclusively confined to English and Germans.——Wales and Cornwall have contributed largely to the population of Utah during the last few years. The population of Great Salt Lake City is 20,000.——The streets are eight
 rods wide
Equal to 64 feet wide.
—and are neither flagged nor paved. A stream of pure mountain spring water courses through each street—and is conducted into the Gardens of the Mormons. The houses are mostly of adobe—or sun-dried brick—and present a neat and comfortable appearance.——They are usually a story and a half high. Now and then you see a fine modern house in Salt Lake City——but no house that is dirty, shabby, and dilapidated—because there are no absolutely poor people in Utah. Every Mormon has a nice garden——and every Mormon has a tidy dooryard.——Neatness is a great characteristic of the Mormons.
The Mormons profess to believe that they are the chosen people of God——they call themselves Latter-day Saints——and they call us people of the outer world Gentiles. They say
 that Mr. Brigham Young is a prophet—the legitimate successor of Joseph Smith—who founded the Mormon religion. They also say they are authorised—by special revelation from Heaven—to marry as many wives as they can comfortably support.
This wife-system they call plurality——the world calls it polygamy. That at its best it is an accursed thing—I need not of course inform you——but you will bear in mind that I am here as a rather cheerful reporter of what I saw in Utah——and I fancy it isn't at all necessary for me to grow virtuously indignant over something we all know is hideously wrong.
You will be surprised to hear—I was amazed to see—that among the Mormon women there are some few persons of education—of positive cultivation
 vation. As a class the Mormons are not an educated people——but they are by no means the community of ignoramuses so many writers have told us they were.
The valley in which they live is splendidly favoured. They raise immense crops. They have mills of all kinds. They have coal—lead—and silver mines. All they eat—all they drink—all they wear they can produce themselves—and still have a great abundance to sell to the gold regions of Idaho on the one hand—and the silver regions of Nevada on the other.
The President of this remarkable community——the head of the Mormon Church——is Brigham Young.——He is called President Young—and Brother Brigham. He is about 54 years old—altho' he doesn't look to be over 45. He has sandy hair and whiskers——is of medium height——and is a little inclined to corpulency.
 He was born in the State of Vermont. His power is more absolute than that of any living sovereign——yet he uses it with such consummate discretion that his people are almost madly devoted to him—and that they would cheerfully die for him if they thought the sacrifice were demanded—I cannot doubt.
He is a man of enormous wealth.——One-tenth of everything sold in the territory of Utah goes to the Church——and Mr. Brigham Young is the Church. It is supposed that he speculates with these funds——at all events—he is one of the wealthiest men now living——worth several millions—without doubt.——He is a bold—bad man——but that he is also a man of extraordinary administrative ability no one can doubt who has watched his astounding career for the past ten years. It is only fair for me to add that he treated me with marked kindness during my sojourn in Utah.
THE SALT LAKE HOUSE.
The hotel in Salt Lake City at which Artemus Ward stopped during his six weeks' stay, and where he was seized with illness. In the distance are the Wahsatch Mountains.
The West Side of Main Street—Salt Lake City—including a view of the Salt Lake Hotel.——It is a temperance hotel.
"
Temperance Hotel
." At the date of our visit, there was only one place in Salt Lake City where strong drink was allowed to be sold. Brigham Young himself owned the property, and vended the liquor by wholesale, not permitting any of it to be drunk on the premises. It was a coarse, inferior kind of whisky, known in Salt Lake as "Valley Tan." Throughout the city there was no drinking-bar nor billiard room, so far as I am aware. But a drink on the sly could always be had at one of the hard-goods stores, in the back office behind the pile of metal saucepans; or at one of the dry-goods stores, in the little parlour in the rear of the bales of calico. At the present time I believe that there are two or three open bars in Salt Lake, Brigham Young having recognised the right of the "Saints" to "liquor up" occasionally. But whatever other failings they may have, intemperance cannot be laid to their charge. Among the Mormons there are no paupers, no gamblers, and no drunkards.
 I prefer temperance hotels—altho' they sell worse liquor than
 any other kind of hotels. But the Salt Lake Hotel sells none——nor is there a bar in all Salt Lake City——but I found when I was thirsty—and I generally am—that I could get some very good brandy of one of the Elders—on the sly—and I never on any account allow my business to interfere with my drinking.
MAIN STREET, SALT LAKE CITY.
This picture is a continuation of the preceding one. The room in which Artemus resided was that in the white part of the house, under the Veranda. The hotel was kept by Mr. James Townsend, a Mormon.
THE COACH TO SALT LAKE.
In the panorama, the Coach is made a much more sightly object than it really was. Instead of looking like a respectable omnibus, it was a huge jolting affair of cumbrous proportions, with sad arrangements for internal comfort.
There is the Overland Mail Coach.
"
Overland Mail Coach
." From Virginia City to Salt Lake we travelled in the coaches of the "Pioneer Stage Company." In leaving Salt Lake for Denver we changed to those of the "Overland Stage Company," of which the renowned Ben Holliday is proprietor, a gentleman whose name on the Plains is better known than that of any other man in America.
——That is, the den on wheels in which we have been
 crammed for the past ten days—and ten nights.——Those of you who have been in Newgate
"
Been in Newgate
." The manner in which Artemus uttered this joke was peculiarly characteristic of his style of lecturing. The commencement of the sentence was spoken as if unpremeditated; then, when he had got as far as the word "Newgate," he paused, as if wishing to call back that which he had said. The applause was unfailingly uproarious. Travelling through the States, he used to say, "Those of you who have been in the Penitentiary." On the morning after his lecture at Pittsburg in Pennsylvania, he was waited on by a tall, gaunt, dark-haired man, of sour aspect and sombre demeanour, who carried in his hand a hickory walking-cane, which he grasped very menacingly, as addressing Artemus he said, "I guess you are the gentleman who lectured last night?" Mr. Ward replied in the affirmative. "Then I've got to have satisfaction from you. I took my wife and her sister to hear you lecter, and you insulted them." "Excuse me," said Artemus. "I went home immediately the lecture was over, and had no conversation with any lady in the hall that evening." The visitor grew more angry, "Hold that, Mr. Lect'rer. You told my wife and her sister that they'd been in the Penitentiary. I must have satisfaction for the insult, and I'm come to get it. "Artemus was hesitating how to reply, when the hotel clerk suddenly appeared upon the scene, saying, "I've a good memory for voices. You are Mr. Josiah Mertin, I believe?" "I am," was the reply. "And I am the late clerk of the Girard House, Philadelphia. There's a little board-bill of yours owing there for ninety-two dollars and a half. You skedaddled without paying. Will you oblige me by waiting till I send for an officer?" I believe that Mr. Josiah Mertin did not even wait for "satisfaction."
—and staid there any length of time——as visitors——can realize how I felt.
The American Overland Mail Route commences at Sacramento—California——and ends at Atchison—Kansas. The distance is two thousand two hundred miles——but you go part
 of the way by rail. The Pacific Railway
"
The Pacific Railway
." The journey was made in the winter of 1863-4. By the time these notes appear in print, the Pacific Railway will be almost complete from the banks of the Missouri to those of the Sacramento, and travellers will soon be able to make the transit of over three thousand miles from New York City to the capital of California, without leaving the railway car, except to cross a ferry, or to change from one station to another.
 is now completed from Sacramento—California—to Fulsom—California——which only leaves two thousand two hundred and eleven miles to go by coach. This breaks the monotony——it came very near breaking my back.
THE MORMON THEATRE.
A brief description of this building will be found in the notes appended to the lecture. Artemus Ward lectured here on "The Babes in the Wood." It was built by Brigham Young, and is his property.
The Mormon Theatre.——This edifice is the exclusive property of Brigham Young. It will comfortably hold 3,000 persons—and I beg you will believe me when I inform you that its interior is quite as brilliant as that of any theatre in London.
"
Brilliant as that of any theatre in London
." Herein Artemus slightly exaggerated. The colouring of the theatre was white and gold, but it was inefficiently lighted with oil lamps. When Brigham Young himself showed us round the theatre, he pointed out, as an instance of his own ingenuity, that the central chandelier was formed out of the wheel of one of his old coaches. The house is now, I believe, lighted with gas. Altogether it is a very wondrous edifice, considering where it is built and who were the builders. At the time of its erection there was no other theatre on the northern part of the American plateau, no building for a similar purpose anywhere for five hundred miles, north, east, south, or west. Many a theatre in the provincial towns of England is not half so substantially built, nor one tithe-part so well appointed. The dressing rooms, wardrobe, tailors' workshop, carpenters' shop, paint room, and library, leave scarcely anything to be desired in their completeness. Brigham Young's son-in-law, Mr. Hiram Clawson, the manager, and Mr. John Cane, the stage manager, if they came to London, might render good service at one or two of our metropolitan playhouses.
The actors are all Mormon amateurs, who charge nothing for their services.
You must know that very little money is taken at the doors of this theatre. The Mormons mostly pay in grain—and all sorts of articles.
The night I gave my little lecture there—among my receipts were corn—flour—pork—
 cheese—chickens——on foot and in the shell.
One family went in on a live pig——and a man attempted to pass a "yaller dog" at the Box Office—but my agent repulsed him. One offered me a doll for admission——another infants' clothing.——I refused to take that.——As a general rule I do refuse.
In the middle of the parquet—in a rocking chair—with his hat on—sits Brigham Young. When the play drags—he either goes out or falls into a tranquil sleep.
A portion of the dress-circle is set apart for the wives of Brigham Young. From ten to twenty of them are usually present. His children fill the entire gallery—and more too.
The East Side of Main Street—Salt Lake City—with a view of the Council Building.——The legislature of Utah meets there. It is like all legislative bodies. They meet this winter to repeal the laws which they met and made last winter——and they will meet next winter to repeal the laws which they met and made this winter.
I dislike to speak about it——but it was in Utah that I made the great speech of my life. I wish you could have heard it. I have a fine education. You may have noticed it. I speak six different languages——London—Chatham—and Dover——Margate—Brighton—
MAIN STREET, SALT LAKE CITY.
The building to the extreme right is the House of Legislature, where the representatives of the territory of Utah hold their meetings. The second house on the right is the Post Office. Main Street is 132 feet in breadth.
 and Hastings. My parents sold a cow—and sent me to college when I was quite young. During the vacation I used to teach a school of whales—and there's where I learned to spout.——I don't expect applause for a little thing like that. I wish you could have heard that speech—however. If Cicero——he's dead now——he has gone from us——but if Old Ciss
"
Old Ciss
." Here again no description can adequately inform the reader of the drollery which characterized the lecturer. His reference to Cicero was made in the most lugubrious manner, as if he really deplored his death and valued him as a schoolfellow loved and lost.
 could have heard that effort it would have given him the rinderpest. I'll tell you how it was. There are stationed in Utah two regiments of U. S. troops——the 21st from California—and the 37th from Nevada. The 20-onesters asked me to present a stand of colours
 to the 37-sters——and I did it in a speech so abounding in eloquence of a bold and brilliant character——and also some sweet talk——real pretty shop-keeping talk——that I worked the enthusiasm of those soldiers up to such a pitch—that they came very near shooting me on the spot.
"
United States Troops
." Our stay in Utah was rendered especially pleasant by the attentions of the regiment of California Cavalry, then stationed at Fort Douglas in the Wahsatch Mountains, three miles beyond and overlooking the city. General Edward O'Connor, the United States Military Governor of Utah, was especially attentive to the wants of poor Artemus during his severe illness; and had it not been for the kind attentions of Dr. Williams, the surgeon to the regiment, I doubt if the invalid would have recovered. General O'Connor had then been two years stationed in Utah, but during the whole of that time had refused to have any personal communication with Brigham Young. The Mormon prophet would sit in his private box, and the United States general occupy a seat in the dress-circle of the theatre. They would look at each other frequently through their opera-glasses, but that constituted their whole intimacy.
UPPER PART OF MAIN STREET.
This picture is a continuation of the preceding one. On the left is a portion of the enclosure wherein the new temple is being built. On the right, part of the grounds belonging to the second in command in the Mormon Church—Mr. Heber C. Kimball
BRIGHAM YOUNG'S PALACE.
To the extreme left is the Lion House. (There is a lion over one of the windows.) It is the harem of the prophet. Every "wife" who inhabits it has a room similarly furnished. They meet in common on the veranda. Brigham Young himself lives with his favourite in the large middle house. The building with the tower to it on the right is the school-house, for the education of the prophet's children only.
Brigham Young's Harem.——These are the houses of Brigham Young. The first on the right is the Lion House—so called because a crouching stone lion adorns the central front window. The adjoining small building is Brigham Young's office—and where he receives his visitors.——The large house in the centre of the picture—which displays a huge bee-hive—is called the Bee House——the bee-hive is supposed to be symbolical of the industry of the Mormons.——Mrs. Brigham Young the first—now quite an old lady—lives here with her children. None of the other wives of the prophet live here. In the rear
 are the school houses where Brigham Young's children are educated.
Brigham Young has two hundred wives. Just think of that! Oblige me by thinking of that. That is—he has eighty actual wives, and he is spiritually married to one hundred and twenty more. These spiritual marriages——as the Mormons call them——are contracted with aged windows—who think it a great honour to be sealed——the Mormons call it being sealed——to the Prophet.
So we may say he has two hundred wives. He loves not wisely—but two hundred well. He is dreadfully married. He's the most married man I ever saw in my life.
I saw his mother-in-law while I was there. I can't exactly tell you how many there is of her—but it's a good deal. It strikes me that
 one mother-in-law is about enough to have in a family——unless you're very fond of excitement.
A few days before my arrival in Utah—Brigham was married again—to a young and really pretty girl
"
A really pretty Girl
." The daughter of the architect of his new theatre.
——but he says he shall stop now. He told me confidentially that he shouldn't get married any more. He says that all he wants now is to live in peace for the remainder of his days—and have his dying pillow soothed by the loving hands of his family. Well—that's all right——that's all right—I suppose——but if 
all
 his family soothe his dying pillow—he'll have to go out-doors to die.
By the way—Shakespeare endorses polygamy.——He speaks of the Merry Wives of Windsor. How many wives did Mr. Windsor have——But we will let this pass.
Some of these Mormons have terrific families. I lectured one night by invitation in the Mormon village of Provost——but during the day I rashly gave a leading Mormon an order admitting himself and family.——It was before I knew that he was much married——and they filled the room to overflowing. It was a great success——but I didn't get any money.
Heber C. Kimball's Harem.—Mr. C. Kimball is the first vice-president of the Mormon church—and would—consequently—succeed to the full presidency on Brigham Young's death.
Brother Kimball is a gay and festive cuss of some seventy summers——or some'ers there
MR. HEBER C. KIMBALL'S HAREM.
The seraglio of Mr. Kimball is large. Unlike Brigham Young, he does not keep his wives under one roof, but has many buildings in his garden, where he assorts them according to their temper and their adaptability to dwelling together in peace.
 about. He has one thousand head of cattle and a hundred head of wives.
"
A hundred head of Wives
." It is an authenticated fact that, in an address to his congregation in the tabernacle, Heber C. Kimball once alluded to his wives by the endearing epithet of "my heifers;" and on another occasion politely spoke of them as "his cows." The phraseology may possibly be a slight indication of the refinement of manners prevalent in Salt Lake City.
 He says they are awful eaters.
Mr. Kimball had a son——a lovely young man——who was married to ten interesting wives. But one day——while he was absent from home——these ten wives went out walking with a handsome young man—which so enraged Mr. Kimball's son—which made Mr. Kimball's son so jealous—that he shot himself with a horse pistuel.
The doctor who attended him——a very scientific man——informed me that the bullet entered the inner parallelogram of his diaphragmatic thorax, superinducing membranous hemorrhage in the outer cuticle of his basilicon-thamaturgist. It killed him. I should have thought it would.
(Soft music.)
"
Soft Music
." Here Artemus Ward's pianist (following instructions) sometimes played the dead march from "
Saul
." At other times, the Welsh air of "Poor Mary Anne;" or any thing else replete with sadness which might chance to strike his fancy. The effect was irresistibly comic.
I hope his sad end will be a warning to all young wives who go out walking with handsome young men. Mr. Kimball's son is now
 no more. He sleeps beneath the cypress—the myrtle—and the willow. This music is a dirge by the eminent pianist for Mr. Kimball's son. He died by request.
I regret to say that efforts were made to make a Mormon of me while I was in Utah.
It was leap-year when I was there—and seventeen young widows——the wives of a deceased Mormon——offered me their hearts and hands. I called on them one day—and taking their soft white hands in mine——which made eighteen hands altogether——I found them in tears.
And I said—"Why is this thus? What is the reason of this thusness?"
They hove a sigh——seventeen sighs of different size.——They said—
"Oh—soon thou wilt be gonested away!"
I told them that when I got ready to leave a place I wentested.
They said—"Doth not like us?"
I said—"I doth——I doth!"
I also said—"I hope your intentions are honourable—as I am a lone child——my parents being far—far away.
They then said—"Wilt not marry us?"
I said—"Oh—no——it cannot was."
Again they asked me to marry them—and again I declined. When they cried—
TABERNACLE AND BOWERY.
The Tabernacle is the building to the left; to the right of it, and within the same enclosure, is the Bowery: a large shed with boughs of trees laid over it, the sides being open. In it religious services are held during the summer months.
"Oh—cruel man! This is too much——oh! too much!"
I told them that it was on account of the muchness that I declined.
"
That I declined
." I remember one evening party in Salt Lake City to which Artemus Ward and myself went. There were thirty-nine ladies and only seven gentlemen.
This is the Mormon Temple.
It is built of adobe—and will hold five thousand persons quite comfortably. A full brass and
 string band often assists the choir of this church——and the choir—I may add—is a remarkably good one.
Brigham Young seldom preaches now. The younger elders——unless on some special occasion——conduct the services. I only heard Mr. Young once. He is not an educated man——but speaks with considerable force and clearness. The day I was there there was nothing coarse in his remarks.
The foundations of the Temple.
These are the foundations of the magnificent Temple the Mormons are building. It is to be
FOUNDATIONS OF THE NEW TEMPLE.
From this picture and that which succeeds may be formed some idea of how far the building of the New Temple had progressed at the time of the lecturer's visit. The stones were being shaped into form by masons who contributed their labour gratuitously.
FOUNDATIONS OF THE TEMPLE. CONTINUED.
The block is forty rods square, and contains ten acres. The position is 4,300 feet above the level of the sea in latitude 40° 45' 44" N., and longitude 112° 6' 8" W. of Greenwich.
 built of hewn stone—and will cover several acres of ground. They say it shall eclipse in splendour all other temples in the world. They also say it shall be paved with solid gold.
"
Solid Gold
." "Where will the gold be obtained from?" is a question which the visitor might reasonably be expected to ask. Unquestionably the mountains of Utah contain the precious metal, though it has not been the policy of Brigham Young and the chiefs of the Mormon Church to disclose their knowledge of the localities in which it is to be found. There is a current report in Salt Lake City that nuggets of gold have been picked up within a radius of a few score of miles from the site of the new temple. But the Mormons, instructed by their Church, profess ignorance on the subject. The discovery of large gold mines, and permission to work them, would attract to the valley of Salt Lake a class of visitors not wished for by Brigham Young and his disciples. Next to the construction of the Pacific Railway, nothing would be more conducive to the downfall of Mormonism than Utah becoming known as an extensive gold-field.
It is perhaps worthy of remark that the architect of this contemplated gorgeous affair repudiated Mormonism—and is now living in London.
The Temple as it is to be.
This pretty little picture is from the architect's design——and cannot therefore—I suppose—be called a fancy sketch.
"
A Fancy Sketch
." Artemus had the windows of the temple in his panorama cut out and filled in with transparent coloured paper, so that, when lighted from behind, it had the effect of one of the little plaster churches with a piece of lighted candle inside, which the Italian image-boys display at times for sale in the streets. Nothing in the course of the evening pleased Artemus more than to notice the satisfaction with which this meretricious piece of absurdity was received by the audience.
Should the Mormons continue unmolested—I think they will complete this rather remarkable edifice.
THE TEMPLE AS IT IS TO BE.
The view is copied from the original drawing by Mr. Truman O. Angell, the architect. There is very little chance under present circumstances that the Temple will be completed. The formation of the Pacific Railway will, in all probability, cause the Mormons to seek a home elsewhere.
PART OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE.
It is situated in the north-eastern corner of Utah Territory, to the north-west of the valley of Salt Lake and about eighteen miles from the city. Its length is nearly seventy miles; its breadth from thirty to thirty-five miles. (N.B.—This is the moon in the management of which Artemus Ward's "moonist" was apt to experience difficulty.)
Great Salt Lake.——The great salt dead sea of the desert.
I know of no greater curiosity than this inland sea of thick brine. It is eighty miles wide—and one hundred and thirty miles long. Solid masses of salt are daily washed ashore in immense heaps—and the Mormon in want of salt has only to go to the shore of this lake and fill his cart. Only—the salt for table use has to be subjected to a boiling process.
"
The Great Salt Lake
." A very general mistake prevails among those not better informed that the Mormon capital is built upon the borders of the Salt Lake. There are eighteen miles of distance between them. Not from any part of the City proper can a view of the Lake be obtained. To get a glimpse of it without journeying towards it, the traveller must ascend to one of the rocky ledges in the range of mountains which back the city. So saline is the water of the lake, that three pailsful of it are said to yield on evaporation one pailful of salt. I never saw the experiment tried.
These are facts—susceptible of the clearest possible proof. They tell one story about this lake—however—that I have my doubts about. They say a Mormon farmer drove forty head of cattle in there once—and they came out first-rate pickled beef.——
THE GREAT SALT LAKE.
PRECEDING VIEW CONTINUED.
This Dead Sea of the Western world is supplied with fresh water from three rivers—the Bear River, the Weber, and the Jordan. The water, according to Captain Burton's statement, contains six times and a half more solid matter than the average solid constituents of sea water.
At this part of the entertainment the lights in the room were turned up, and the audience allowed a very brief "interval for refreshments." Artemus Ward had to recover from the fatigue of attending to the moon.
I sincerely hope you will excuse my absence——I am a man short—and have to work the moon myself.
"
The Moon myself
." Here Artemus would leave the rostrum for a few moments, and pretend to be engaged behind. The picture was painted for a night-scene, and the effect intended to be produced was that of the moon rising over the lake and rippling on the waters. It was produced in the usual dioramic way, by making the track of the moon transparent and throwing the moon on from the bull's eye of a lantern. When Artemus went behind, the moon would become nervous and flickering, dancing up and down in the most inartistic and undecided manner. The result was that, coupled with the lecturer's oddly expressed apology, the "moon" became one of the best laughed-at parts of the entertainment.
I shall be most happy to pay a good salary to any respectable boy of good parentage and education who is a good moonist.
The Endowment House.
"
The Endowment House
." To the young ladies of Utah this edifice possesses extreme interest. The Mormon ceremony of marriage is said to be of the most extraordinary character; various symbolical scenes being enacted, and the bride, and bridegroom invested with sacred garments which they are never to part with. In all Salt Lake I could not find a person who would describe to me the ceremonies of the Endowment House, nor could Artemus or myself obtain admission within its mystic walls.
In this building the Mormon is initiated into the mysteries of the faith.
Strange stories are told of the proceedings which are held in this building——but I have no possible means of knowing how true they may be.
THE ENDOWMENT HOUSE.
That which takes place within this building travellers may guess at but are not permitted to know. It is where the Mormon marriages are celebrated. On the mountain above a figure out of all proportion to the scenery is supposed to represent Artemus Ward attacked by a bear in front and a pack of wolves in the rear.
ENTRANCE TO ECHO CANYON.
High bluffs of yellow colour and conglomerate formation, full of small fossils. The buildings at the base constitute Weber's Station, where the coach stops for the mules to be changed, and the passengers to obtain refreshments.
Echo Canyon.
Salt Lake City is fifty-five miles behind us—and this is Echo Canyon—in reaching which we are supposed to have crossed the summit of the Wahsatch Mountains. These ochre-coloured bluffs——formed of conglomerate sandstone—and full of fossils——signal the entrance to the Canyon. At its base lies Weber Station.
Echo Canyon is about twenty-five miles long. It is really the sublimest thing between the Missouri and the Sierra Nevada. The red wall to the left develops further up the Canyon into pyramids—buttresses—and castles——honey combed and fretted in nature's own massive magnificence of architecture.
In 1856—Echo Canyon was the place selected by Brigham Young for the Mormon General Wells to fortify and make impregnable against the advance of the American army—led by General Albert Sidney Johnson. It was to have been the Thermopylae of Mormondom——but it wasn't. General Wells was to have done Leonidas——but he didn't.
A more cheerful view of the Desert.
The wild snow storms have left us—and we have thrown our wolf-skin overcoats aside. Certain tribes of far-western Indians bury their distinguished dead by placing them high in air and covering them with valuable furs——that is a very fair representation of these mid-air tombs. Those
THE INDIANS ON THE PLAINS.
On the right of the picture is the scaffold erected for an Indian grave. The corpse is placed on the top of it, out of the way of the wolves, though not so protected but what the vultures and other birds of carrion soon render it a mere skeleton.
 animals are horses——I know they are—because my artist says so. I had the picture two years before I discovered the fact.——The artist came to me about six months ago—and said——"It is useless to disguise it from you any longer——they are horses."
"
They are Horses
." Here again Artemus called in the aid of pleasant banter as the most fitting apology for the atrocious badness of the painting.
It was while crossing this desert that I was surrounded by a band of Ute Indians. They were splendidly mounted——they were dressed in beaver-skins——and they were armed with rifles—knives—and pistols.
What could I do?——What could a poor old orphan do? I'm a brave man.——The day before the Battle of Bull's Run I stood in the highway while the bullets——those dreadful messengers of death——were passing all around me thickly——IN WAGGONS——on
 their way to the battle field.
"
Their way to the battle-field
." This was the great joke of Artemus Ward's first lecture, "The Babes in the Wood." He never omitted it in any of his lectures, nor did it lose its power to create laughter by repetition. The audiences at the Egyptian Hall, London, laughed as immoderately at it as did those of Irving Hall, New York, or of the Tremont Temple in Boston.
 But there were too many of these Injuns——there were, forty of them—and only one of me——and so I said—
"Great Chief—I surrender." His name was Wocky-bocky.
He dismounted—and approached me. I saw his tomahawk glisten in the morning sunlight. 
 Fire was in his eye. Wocky-bocky came very close to me and seized me by the hair of my head. He mingled his swarthy fingers with my golden
OUR ENCOUNTER WITH THE INDIANS.
Utah Territory contains Indians of two races—the Shoshones and the Utes. The Utes are very friendly with the Mormons, who treat them with uniform kindness. It is commonly believed that a secret treaty of alliance exists between Brigham Young and the chiefs of the Indian tribes. (The left hand portion of the illustration belongs to the preceding picture.)
 tresses——and he rubbed his dreadful Thomas-hawk across my lily-white face. He said—
"Torsha arrah darrah mishky bookshean!"
I told him he was right.
Wocky-bocky again rubbed his tomahawk across my face, and said—"Wink-ho—loo-boo!"
Says I—"Mr. Wocky-bocky"—says I——"Wocky—I have thought so for years—and so's all our family."
He told me I must go the tent of the Strong-Heart—and eat raw dog.
"
Raw dog
." While sojourning for a day in a camp of Sioux Indians we were informed that the warriors of the tribe were accustomed to eat raw dog to give them courage previous to going to battle. Artemus was greatly amused with the information. When, in after years, he became weak and languid, and was called upon to go to lecture, it was a favourite joke with him to inquire, "Hingston, have you got any raw dog?"
 It don't agree with me. I prefer simple food. I prefer pork-pie—because then I know what I'm eating.
 But as raw dog was all they proposed to give to me—I had to eat it or starve. So at the expiration of two days I seized a tin plate and went to the chief's daughter—and I said to her in a silvery voice——in a kind of German-silvery voice——I said—
"Sweet child of the forest, the pale-face wants his dog."
There was nothing but his paws! I had paused too long! Which reminds me that time passes. A way which time has.
I was told in my youth to seize opportunity. I once tried to seize one. He was rich. He had diamonds on. As I seized him—he knocked me down. Since then I have learned that he who seizes opportunity sees the penitentiary.
The Rocky Mountains.
THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.
The view may recall to those who have seen it Mr. Bierstadt's celebrated picture. Unfortunately for us, when we crossed, every inch of the ground was covered with snow.
THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS SCENERY.
This picture is a continuation of the preceding view. In the course of the journey, Artemus Ward passed a day among an encampment of Sioux, whose numbers must have exceeded three thousand.
I take it for granted you have heard of these popular mountains. In America they are regarded as a great success, and we all love dearly to talk about them. It is a kind of weakness with us. I never knew but one American who hadn't something—sometime—to say about the Rocky Mountains——and he was a deaf and dumb man, who couldn't say anything about nothing.
But these mountains—whose summits are snow-covered and icy all the year round—are too grand to make fun of. I crossed them in the winter of '64—in a rough sleigh drawn by four mules.
This sparkling waterfall is the Laughing-Water alluded to by Mr. Longfellow in his Indian poem—"Higher-Water." The water is higher up there.
The plains of Colorado.
These are the dreary plains over which we rode for so many weary days. An affecting incident occurred on these plains some time since, which I am sure you will pardon me for introducing here.
On a beautiful June morning—some sixteen years ago——
(
Music very loud till the scene is off
.)
THE PLAINS OF COLORADO.
This view and the one which follows it convey a faint idea of the barrenness and desolation of a portion of the journey.
CROSSING THE PLAINS. AN EMIGRANT CARAVAN.
Nearly all the inhabitants of Salt Lake City have had to travel thither in emigrant trains, undergoing countless hardships on the way. The skeletons of animals and the remains of broken-down vehicles serve to mark out the track.
——and she fainted on Reginald's breast!
"
On Reginald's breast
." At this part of the lecture Artemus pretended to tell a story—the piano playing loudly all the time. He continued his narration in excited dumb-show—his lips moving as though he were speaking. For some minutes the audience indulged in unrestrained laughter.
The Prairie on Fire.
A prairie on fire is one of the wildest and grandest sights that can possibly be imagined.
These fires occur—of course—in the summer—when the grass is dry as tinder——and the flames rush and roar over the prairie in a manner frightful to behold. They usually burn better than mine is burning to-night. I try to make my prairie burn regularly—and not disappoint the public——but it is not as high-principled as I am.
"
As high-principled as I am
." The scene was a transparent one—the light from behind so managed as to give the effect of the prairie on fire. Artemus enjoyed the joke of letting the fire go out occasionally, and then allowing it to relight itself.
THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE.
Artemus Ward had an opportunity of seeing part of a Prairie on Fire, just as he entered the State of Kansas. The grandeur of the scene made a very deep impression upon him. He frequently alluded to it in conversation.
THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE.
CONTINUED.
The effect of the Prairie being on Fire was illustrated in the panorama by means of a revolving cloth behind; a portion of the picture being transparent.
BRIGHAM YOUNG AT HOME.
This is, of course, a mere fancy sketch. It was roughly designed by Artemus Ward himself. According to his own statement, made in a very playful manner, it represents that which he saw on an afternoon passed with the prophet at the palace.
Brigham Young at home.
The last picture I have to show you represents Mr. Brigham Young in the bosom of his family. His family is large—and the olive branches around his table are in a very tangled condition. He is more a father than any man I know. When at home——as you here see him——he ought to be very happy with sixty wives
 to minister to his comforts—and twice sixty children to soothe his distracted mind. Ah! my friends——what is home without a family?
What will become of Mormonism? We all know and admit it to be a hideous wrong——a great immoral stain upon the 'scutcheon of the United States. My belief is that its existence is dependent upon the life of Brigham Young. His administrative ability holds the system together——his power of will maintains it as the faith of a community. When he dies—Mormonism will die too. The men who are around him have neither his talent nor his energy. By means of his strength it is held together. When he falls—Mormonism will also fall to pieces.
"
That Lion has a tail
." The lion on a pedestal, as painted in the panorama—its tail outstretched like that of the leonine adornment to Northumberland House, was a pure piece of frolic on the part of the entertainer. Brigham Young certainly adopts the lion as a Mormon emblem. A beehive and a lion, suggestive of industry and strength, are the symbols of the Mormons in Salt Lake City.
 That lion—you perceive—has a tail. It is a long one already. Like mine—it is to be continued in our next.
"
To be continued in our next
." To re-visit Utah, and to do another and a better lecture about it was a favourite idea of Artemus Ward. Another fancy that he had was to visit the stranger countries of the Eastern world and find in some of them matter for a humorous lecture. While ill in Utah, he read Mr. Layard's book on Nineveh, left behind at the hotel by a traveller passing through Salt Lake. Mr. Layard's reference to the Yezedi, or "Devil worshippers," took powerful hold on the imagination of the reader. During our trip home across the plains he would often, sometimes in jest and sometimes in earnest, chat about a trip to Asia to see the "Devil worshippers." Naturally his inclinations were nomadic, and had a longer life been granted to him I believe that he would have seen more of the surface of this globe than even the generality of his countrymen see, much as they are accustomed to travel. Within about the same distance from Portland in England that his own birth-place is from Portland in Maine, his travels came to an end. He died at Southampton. His great wish was for strength to return to his home, that he might die with the face of his own mother bending over him, and in the cottage where he was born.
"COeLUMQUE ADSPICIT ET MORIENS DULCES REMINISCITUR ARGOS."
E. P. H
THE END.
